


NEW ARTICLE


Brexit: Talks enter last day before crunch EU summit

EU and UK officials will resume Brexit talks this morning in the hope of reaching a deal that can be agreed by leaders at a key summit on Thursday.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson is expected to update the cabinet on the progress of the negotiations, which continued into the early hours.

On Tuesday there were reports a deal was imminent, amid claims the UK had made concessions over the Irish border.

But Downing Street said there was "more work still to do".

After talks ended on Tuesday, No 10 said the discussions had been "constructive" and progress was being made.

The EU's chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, will update the bloc on the state of the negotiations later when he briefs EU commissioners and ambassadors.

Mr Johnson is facing a race against the clock to reach a new Brexit deal before the two-day gathering of EU leaders.

Any deal will need to be published - along with a legal text - if the EU27 are to consider ratifying the withdrawal agreement at their summit.

That meeting is crucial because under legislation passed last month - the Benn Act - Mr Johnson is compelled to ask the bloc for a delay to Brexit if he does not get a new deal approved by MPs by Saturday.

The UK is due to leave the EU at 23:00 GMT on 31 October and the prime minister has repeatedly insisted he will not request a delay.


But in addition to the challenges of reaching an agreement with the EU this week, Mr Johnson also requires support from Conservative Brexiteers and Democratic Unionists if he is likely to get his deal through Parliament.

Such support rests on the UK's proposed alternative to the Irish backstop - the measure aimed at preventing a hard border on the island of Ireland.

On Tuesday evening, meetings were held at Downing Street with backbench MPs and leaders of the DUP.

After a 90-minute meeting with the prime minister, the DUP said "it would be fair to indicate gaps remain and further work is required".

Earlier in the day, the party's leader, Arlene Foster, said she could not accept reported plans of a customs border in the Irish Sea - meaning Northern Ireland would be treated differently from the rest of the UK.

Another Brexiteer, former Northern Ireland Secretary Owen Paterson, told the Sun he would wait to see the full details of a deal, but added that a border down the Irish Sea would be "unacceptable".

'Tolerable deal'

However, the chair of the pro-Brexit European Research Group, Steve Baker, struck a more upbeat tone, saying he was "optimistic" that "a tolerable deal" could be reached.

And Iain Duncan Smith, another Brexiteer and former Conservative party leader, said there was a "genuine strong sense of goodwill" towards the prime minister's efforts.


Most of his party - "bar a small core" - wanted to get a deal and he suspected they would want to back it, he told BBC Breakfast.

He denied reports in the Sun newspaper that he "exploded" at Downing Street officials during Tuesday's meeting, saying he was in fact rushing to get on the London Underground to get back to his constituency.

DBP. Let's have a new one, a new acronym of course, because Brexit has been nothing if not a journey through collections of syllables that once might have seemed unfamiliar to even political aficionados, but now trip off the tongue.

DUP? Easy one, the Tories' Northern Irish allies.

ERG, obvious too, the European Research Group - the Brexiteers' club.

Then there is NCP, what was once upon a time Theresa May's plan for customs, the IP, the implementation period, the departure lounge after Brexit, and so on, and so on, and so on, until we all lose the will to live.

If you are still with me then let's introduce "DBP", because on a very odd day in Westminster, it's the phrase I have heard almost more than any other - difficult but possible.

Read Laura's full blog here.

Regardless of what happens in Brussels, a showdown is anticipated in an emergency sitting of Parliament on Saturday - the first in 37 years, if it goes ahead.

MPs will be able to back or reject any deal presented to them and there will be discussions on what to do next.

However, ministers have yet to confirm the sitting would happen, saying it would depend on events in Brussels.

Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats have tabled an amendment to the Queen's Speech, calling for any deal to be put to voters in a referendum.

If selected by the Commons Speaker, MPs could vote on the amendment for a so-called people's vote next week.

Lib Dem leader Jo Swinson told BBC Breakfast the economic hit of Mr Johnson's deal could be worse than the financial crash of 2008, and therefore it "should be up to the public to have their say".

Timeline: What's happening ahead of Brexit deadline?

Thursday 17 October - Crucial two-day summit of EU leaders begins in Brussels. This is the last such meeting currently scheduled before the Brexit deadline.

Saturday 19 October - Special sitting of Parliament expected - and the date by which the PM must ask the EU for another delay to Brexit under the Benn Act, if no Brexit deal has been approved by MPs and they have not agreed to the UK leaving with no-deal.

Thursday 31 October - Date by which the UK is currently due to leave the EU.


NEW ARTICLE


Harry Dunn's parents meet President Trump at White House

Harry Dunn's parents have rejected the chance to meet the suspect in their son's crash death at the White House.

Anne Sacoolas, 42, returned to the United States days after the crash which killed 19-year-old Harry.

Harry's parents met US President Donald Trump at the White House, and he revealed Mrs Sacoolas was in a room next door.

But Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn declined to meet her and said they felt "a little ambushed" by the offer.

The president said Mrs Sacoolas was in an adjoining room but they refused to see her, saying the conditions were not right.

Mr Trump was sympathetic but did not agree to Mrs Sacoolas' UK return, Harry's parents said.

Family spokesman Radd Seiger described the White House meeting as "absolutely extraordinary" and "unprecedented".

Harry died near RAF Croughton in Northamptonshire on 27 August when his motorcycle was in a crash with a Volvo.

Mrs Sacoolas - who is reportedly married to a US intelligence official who was stationed at RAF Croughton - was interviewed by police but then returned to the United States after claiming diplomatic

immunity.


Ms Charles said after the White House meeting: "When [President Trump] held my hand, I gripped it a lot tighter and I was honest with him and just said... 'if it was your son you would be doing the same as us'.

"He actually gripped my hand a little bit tighter and said 'yes I would be'. And that's when he said he would try and look at this from a different angle.

"I can only hope that he was sincere enough to consider doing that for us.

"He's the one in control here, but we're the ones in control of our situation as much as he can be - we still want justice for Harry and we will take it as far as we possibly can to ensure that that's done.

"We do feel that we have done as much as we can at the moment."

Mr Seiger told BBC Breakfast: "After quite sincere and warm condolences [President Trump] got down to business and said he had Mrs Sacoolas in the next room.

"I looked to my side and I saw at least three photographers ready to almost do a press call."

He insisted the meeting should take place in the UK, in the presence of therapists and mediators, but "certainly now now and certainly not in the White House in front of a bank of photographers".

"You don't just throw open the circus doors with the cameras," he added.

US national security adviser Robert O'Brien told the family during the meeting that Mrs Sacoolas "was never coming back" to the UK, Mr Seiger said.


Mr Dunn said of turning down the chance to meet Mrs Sacoolas at the White House: "We weren't ready to meet her - it would have been too rushed.

"It's not what we wanted - we wanted a meeting with her in the UK."

But he added that the trip to the White House "didn't feel like a stunt".

"I think the president was very graceful and spoke very well to us.

"He listened to Charlotte very well, she spoke excellently to him and he was very understanding.

"I genuinely do think he will look to resolve this in a way that will help us."

Over the weekend, Mrs Sacoolas broke her silence over Mr Dunn's death in a letter via her lawyers.

In it she said she wanted to meet his parents "so that she can express her deepest sympathies and apologies for this tragic accident".

Mrs Sacoolas was said to be covered by diplomatic immunity as the spouse of a US intelligence official, though that protection is now in dispute.


NEW ARTICLE


The UK cities where rent is rising the fastest

The cost of renting a home rose fastest in Nottingham, Leeds and Bristol in the past year, research indicates, while Aberdeen recorded the biggest fall.

The survey, from property website Zoopla, said tenants moving into a Nottingham home this summer paid 5.4% more in rent than a year earlier.

Leeds and Bristol (up 4.5%) were the only other UK cities where rents rose faster than UK average wage growth.

On average, renting a UK home has become more affordable, Zoopla said.

Part of the reason lies in an increase in the number of people buying their first own home, relieving some of the pressure on the rental sector.

Tenants moving in Aberdeen - where the local economy is affected significantly by the oil industry - saw rents drop by 4.1% in the third quarter of the year, compared with a year earlier.

Coventry and Middlesbrough also saw renting become cheaper, according to the inaugural Zoopla quarterly rental report.

Who is affected?

Nearly three-quarters of 16 to 24-year-olds and almost half of 25 to 34-year-olds rent from a private landlord, according to the government's Family Resources Survey.

The sector is concentrated in London, with about a third of rental properties in the UK found in the city. This is also where the typical rent per month is the most expensive.

The Zoopla report suggests that the typical tenant in the UK spends nearly a third of their earnings on rent (31.8%), slightly less than the peak in 2016.

Outside of London, tenants spent the highest proportion of earnings in Oxford, Brighton and Cambridge, with the lowest in Hull, Bradford and Stoke.

UK-wide rental prices are up by an average of 2% in the last year, which is about half the typical level of wage rises.

"Renting is more affordable today than the 10-year average. [An increase in] first-time buyers, 80% of whom exit the private renting sector to buy, has also moderated rental demand," said Richard Donnell, of Zoopla, which has based the figures on its listings and other data.

"Rental affordability varies widely across the country, reflecting the relative strength of local economies."

Across the UK, homes take an average of 17 days to rent, based on the time between a listing being posted and removed. This is down from one year ago, when homes took 19 days to rent, and much shorter than the time it takes to sell a property.

The typical tenant spent nearly four years in the same property, Mr Donnell said.


NEW ARTICLE


Harry's emotional moment during speech over Meghan's pregnancy
Video

The Duke of Sussex shared an intimate moment with attendees at the WellChild Awards.

He recalled how he knew at last year's event that his wife, the Duchess of Sussex, was pregnant and they were both thinking about what it would be like to be parents one day.

The charity, of which Prince Harry is patron, helps seriously ill children spend time out of hospital and return home to be with their families.

He welled up as he spoke at the ceremony, which celebrates the children, their families and the people who support them.


NEW ARTICLE


Turkey-Syria offensive: Erdogan rejects US ceasefire call

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has rejected a US call for an immediate ceasefire in northern Syria.

Mr Erdogan's comments come ahead of a visit to Turkey by the US vice-president and US secretary of state.

Turkey launched an offensive designed to drive away Kurdish troops after their main ally, the US, pulled out.

Russia, which backs Syria, has said it prevent clashes between Turkish and Syrian forces which have now moved into the area after a deal with the Kurds.

Turkey considers elements of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) a terrorist organisation and want to push them away from the border area.

Ankara also says it wants to create a "safe zone" reaching about 30km (20 miles) into Syria to resettle up to two million Syrian refugees currently in Turkey.

However, Syrian forces - which are backed by Russia - advanced north at the weekend following a deal with the Kurds to try to hold back the Turkish operation.

Critics of the Trump administration say the withdrawal of US troops from the region gave Turkey a "green light" for the offensive.

The US has repeatedly denied this, and on Monday Washington announced sanctions on Turkish ministries and senior government officials.

Dozens of civilians have been killed in the operation so far and at least 160,000 have fled the area, according to the UN.

On Tuesday, the medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said it had "taken the difficult decision to suspend the majority of its activities and evacuate all its international staff from north-east Syria".

What did President Erdogan say?

"They say 'declare a ceasefire'. We will never declare a ceasefire," Mr Erdogan told reporters on Tuesday.


"They are pressuring us to stop the operation. They are announcing sanctions. Our goal is clear. We are not worried about any sanctions," the president added.

President Vladimir Putin has discussed the situation with Mr Erdogan in a phone call and invited him to Russia for a working visit "in the coming days", the Kremlin announced on Wednesday.

Mr Erdogan is also expected to meet US Vice-President Mike Pence and US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in the Turkish capital, Ankara, on Thursday.

Mr Pence on Monday warned that the US sanctions against Turkey would worsen "unless and until Turkey embraces an immediate ceasefire" and negotiates a long-term settlement on the border.

US President Donald Trump has faced mounting pressure to take action against Turkey - a key Nato partner - including from Republicans usually loyal to his administration.

What's the latest on the ground?

Syrian government forces on Tuesday entered the strategic town of Manbij, inside the area where Turkey wants to create its "safe zone".

Meanwhile, Turkish troops and pro-Turkish, anti-government fighters had also been gathering near Manbij.

Over the past two years, hundreds of US troops have visibly patrolled the strategic town, but they left earlier this week.

On Tuesday, Russia - a key ally of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad - said its forces were patrolling along the "line of contact" between Syrian and Turkish forces.


Moscow describes the Turkish offensive as "unacceptable". On Tuesday, President Erdogan and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin discussed the issue in a phone call.

For now, Syrian forces have not been deployed between Tal Abyad and Ras al-Ain, where Turkey has focused its efforts.

How did we get here?

Kurdish-led forces have been a key ally of the US in the fight against the Islamic State (IS) group in Syria.

They described the US withdrawal, which preceded Turkish action, as a "stab in the back".


There are fears the destabilisation could lead to a resurgence of so-called Islamic State (IS), as thousands of former fighters and their relatives are being detained in northern Syria.

Hundreds of IS family members are said to have already escaped from one camp.

Analysts say that apart from fighting IS, the Kurds were fundamental to the US in limiting the influence of rivals Russia and Iran and keeping some leverage on the ground.


NEW ARTICLE


'Send nudes' Boohoo ad banned after complaint

UK fashion company Boohoo has been told one of its emailed advertisements must not use the phrase "Send nudes".

The company put the phrase in a message sent to promote a range of clothes coloured to resemble skin.

The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) upheld a complaint about the advert because it made light of a "potentially harmful social trend".

Boohoo has also been told to make sure its advertising is "socially responsible".

Sexual photos

In its ruling, the ASA said it knew the term "nude" was often used in the fashion world to refer to colours similar to skin tones.

But it said the phrase "Send nudes" was more likely to be interpreted as a harassing request for sexual photos rather than as a reference to a range of clothes.

As well as the words appearing across an image inside the emailed advert, the phrase also formed the message's subject line.

The ASA said: "Increased pressure to share such photos had been linked to negative outcomes for young people."

And the market Boohoo targeted probably meant the advert had reached children - especially those who wanted to dress like a "slightly older age group".

Boohoo said: "We note the ASA's ruling and recognise our obligations to ensure that advertising is socially responsible."

Seductive poses

In a separate ruling, the ASA banned a video advert for clothing company Missguided, broadcast in June, which "objectified women".

Missguided said the advert, featuring women assuming a series of seductive poses in swimwear and other summer clothes, served to promote a "particular lifestyle" rather than just clothing.

And the "display of skin was relevant, necessary and unavoidable" given the ad was for beach-wear.

The ASA disagreed and said the images were "highly sexualised" and some of the women depicted in the poses were not wearing the clothes Missguided said it was promoting.

The ad was likely to cause "serious offence" to some people, it said.

Missguided has been told not to run the ad again and must guard against creating similar content that "objectifies women".


NEW ARTICLE


More children caught bringing knives into school

More than a thousand children were caught with weapons in school last year, according to a survey of 29 police forces in England and Wales.

The weapons included knives, blades, knuckledusters and a Taser stun gun, the Press Association survey found.

The children included a 14-year-old with a sword and a four-year-old with an unnamed weapon.

Head teachers' leader Geoff Barton said the findings were "grim but unsurprising".

The survey, which follows concern about rising levels of knife crime, was based on Freedom of Information data from police forces.

Rising problem

It found schoolchildren involved in incidents with many different types of bladed weapon, including lock knives, penknives, craft knives and garden shears.

In Bedfordshire, a pupil was caught in possession of a machete and in Manchester a samurai sword was recovered from school premises.


Thames Valley police discovered a bayonet in a school and in the West Midlands, a 15-year-old was found in possession of an axe.

The figures showed 1,072 incidents involving weapons, up from 831 in the same areas in the previous year - but did not include statistics from the biggest force, the Metropolitan Police in London.

The data was based on the financial year - and the survey found anther 311 incidents between April and August 2019.

'Serious violence'

"Serious violence is a growing problem amongst young people and we continue to work closely with partners to address this," said Chief Constable Olivia Pinkney, lead for young people on the National Police Chiefs' Council.

"Police involvement in schools, whether it be officers delivering talks and interactive sessions or based in schools themselves as part of the Safer Schools Partnership, helps us to educate young people and explain why carrying a weapon is never the right choice."

But Lucy Martindale, a youth worker from south London who campaigns against knife violence, said: "The situation is getting worse, even just this year.

"Some young people I speak to say before they leave the house - where most people check they have picked up their keys and wallet or purse - they check they have their knives with them."

Mr Barton, general secretary of the ASCL head teachers' union, said this is a problem that schools cannot tackle on their own and called for more community support and "investment in policing".

Gang pressure

"The scourge of weapons has grown worse in recent years, and while there are a number of complex factors involved, a key issue has been cuts in policing and local support services for vulnerable families.

"Gangs have filled this vacuum and often pressure and groom young people into dealing drugs and carrying weapons," Mr Barton said.

A Department for Education spokesman said £10m had been invested in "behaviour hubs" to share information between schools on improving discipline.

"We have strengthened teachers' powers so they can take action if they suspect a pupil has brought a prohibited item, including knives, into school."


NEW ARTICLE


Brexit: What can the UK learn from Norway's EU border?
Video

A key question in Brexit negotiations has been how Britain's new land border with the EU should work, where Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland meet.Norway is a country that already borders the EU. Its border, with EU member state Sweden, is over a thousand miles long and very difficult to police, leaving the door open to smugglers.

With the 31 October Brexit deadline fast approaching, is there anything the UK can learn from the Norway example?

Reporter: Andrew Bomford Video Journalist: Tom Bateman


NEW ARTICLE


Newspaper headlines: Johnson 'on brink of Brexit deal' amid late talks











The Guardian says Boris Johnson has made "major concessions" in Brexit talks and that "negotiating teams have agreed in principle that there will be a customs border down the Irish Sea".

It quotes senior EU and British sources as saying that a draft text of the agreement could be published on Wednesday, if Downing Street gives the final green light.

The Financial Times reports that the prime minister has been haggling with the DUP's leader, Arlene Foster, about a big cash payment for Northern Ireland to secure her support.

The Daily Telegraph says Mr Johnson is increasingly optimistic that a deal could be agreed by both the EU and Parliament before the end of the week.

The paper's cartoonist, Matt, sums it all up, showing a baffled woman confronted with a billboard reading: "Only 70 Brexit crunch days to Christmas".


Several papers report that the British Legion's red poppy will this year, for the first time, be used to remember civilian victims of war and of acts of terrorism.

A spokesman for the Legion says the organisation wants to make sure people know it reflects the views and values of modern Britain.

The Guardian says the change is a sensitive issue for the charity. It's been criticised by the pacifist campaign group, the Peace Pledge Union, which sells white poppies and opposes military marches at remembrance ceremonies.

The Times reports research suggesting that living in an area with high pollution could worsen the memory as much as ageing 10 years. The study of 34,000 people across England measured levels of nitrogen dioxide and particulate pollution from exhaust fumes and other sources.

The scientists didn't prove that air quality caused affected memory but believe they ruled out other factors. An academic from Warwick University tells the paper: "When it comes to remembering a string of words, a 50-year-old in polluted Chelsea performs like a 60-year-old who lives in relatively unpolluted Plymouth."

The Guardian reports on the latest efforts to repatriate the remains of James Joyce and his wife from Zurich to Dublin, more than 70 years after the author's death.


Two city councillors claim it would be observing the author's final wish - despite his choice to spend decades in self-imposed exile to gain artistic freedom.

They want the council to ask the Irish government to approve the idea in time for the centenary of Joyce's novel, Ulysses, in 2022.

Many of the papers tell the story of the man who found a wallet in the street - and hit upon an ingenious method of tracing the owner.

Simon Byford realised he could send a short message through bank transfers using account details on the debit card in the wallet. He transferred one penny four times, each time writing in the space allowed for a payment reference.

When combined, the message read, "Hi, I found your wallet in the road. Text or call". The owner, Tim Cameron, who is Australian, tells the Daily Mail the wallet contained his residence permit and that Mr Byford is "a legend".

Get news from the BBC in your inbox, each weekday morning

Mr Byford tells the Times, "He called me right away and came around with a bottle of red wine - I'm still waiting for the four pence".

An Oxford professor accused of selling papyrus fragments of the Bible to an American millionaire appears in The Guardian, the Times and the Daily Telegraph.

The Egypt Exploration Society claims Dirk Obbink sold 11 priceless fragments from its archive, which were among half a million discovered in a rubbish dump 100 miles from Cairo by Victorian explorers.

Professor Obbink had been classifying the fragments. The buyer is said to be a chain of craft shops, Hobby Lobby Stores, founded by Steve Green, who founded the Museum of the Bible in Washington DC. The Society says it's now recovered the fragments from the museum.

Oxford University says it's conducting an internal investigation to establish the facts. The Times says the professor is still employed by the university and did not reply to requests for comment.


NEW ARTICLE


Yikes! Fox and rodent battle is top wildlife photo

It looks like it ought to be the subject of a funny caption competition but this picture taken in China's Qilian Mountains is deadly serious.

The fox has surprised the marmot and a fight is about to begin that will result in the rodent being killed.

Not even the intervention of the marmot's mother can change the outcome.

"That's nature," says Yongqing Bao, who's striking image has earned him the top prize in the 2019 Wildlife Photographer of the Year competition.

The shot also meant Yongqing got to share the award for the best picture in the mammal behaviour category.

Persistence pays when you are a wildlife photographer, and Yongqing had to stake out an alpine meadow on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau for several hours to be in position to catch the action.

The fox had lain very still, hoping to trap a passing marmot unawares. It worked a treat. In one of the more gruesome frames on Yongqing's camera, the fox has the young rodent's head in its mouth.

Roz Kidman Cox was the chair of judges. "The WPY competition has behaviour entries like no other. The world's top photographers in the field of animal behaviour always enter, and I have to say this image is one of the best I've ever seen," she told BBC News.

This year's junior grand prize winner is Cruz Erdmann for his night-time image of a bigfin reef squid in the Lembeh Strait off North Sulawesi, Indonesia. Cruz had entered in the 11-14 years category.


Getting a clear shot of the iridescent cephalopod takes a good deal of technical prowess. "You have to be careful not to stir up the silt when you dive or you'll get a lot of backscatter from the strobe light. I wasn't kicking with my legs so that's why the photo seems very clear," he said.

WPY, as it's often called, is one of the most prestigious competitions of its type in world photography.

Started in 1964, the competition is now organised by London's Natural History Museum.

An exhibition of the best images opens at the South Kensington institution on Friday. Next year's competition starts taking entries from Monday.

Scroll down for some of the other category winners.

Land of the eagle by Audun Rikardsen, Norway


Winner 2019, Behaviour: Birds. This shot took Audun three years to achieve. He'd carefully placed an old tree branch in a position where the golden eagles would come into land. A camera and flash would trigger as soon as a bird set down.

Audun recalled: "They became so used to the flash going off, it didn't seem to bother them. I think they like having their picture taken." Crows would do it as well, but that wasn't quite the picture the Norwegian photographer was after.

The huddle by Stefan Christmann, Germany


Winner 2019, Wildlife Photographer of the Year Portfolio Award. The toughest of the tough. More than 5,000 emperor penguins gather together in their classic huddle formation to beat the wind and late winter cold on the sea-ice in front of the Ekström Ice Shelf in East Antarctica. These are male birds incubating eggs at their feet. The females have gone to sea to forage.

The rat pack by Charlie Hamilton James, UK


Winner 2019, Urban Wildlife. Charlie was on an assignment for National Geographic, to photograph the rats of the world. This group he found in the Wall Street district of Manhattan, New York.

The rodents were living under a grill that surrounded the base of a tree. At night they'd run over to the rubbish bins outside a hotel to feed. Charlie set up his camera and fired the shutter with a remote trigger from a couple of metres away.

"There were probably 30 rats living under the grate. They became so used to me over three days that one of them came and stood on my foot," Charlie said.

The architectural army by Daniel Kronauer, USA


Winner 2019, Behaviour: Invertebrates. These army ants in Costa Rica don't build a nest in the earth or in an old tree. Instead, they construct it out of their own bodies, hanging from branches in interlocking chains. Inside, are passageways and chambers where they protect their queen and nurture their young.

"Pretty much every day they disassemble this structure; it just melts away and they carry the larvae across the rainforest, setting up a new bivouac maybe 150m away," Daniel said. "It's beautiful. I thought this nest looked like a crown or a cathedral."

Snow exposure by Max Waugh, USA


Winner 2019, Black and White. No WPY is complete without a good "whiteout" image. This one of a bison was captured in Yellowstone National Park. The bison wants to get at the buried grasses and sedges and so makes a hole by brushing its face from side to side.

"I'd been in situations like this before where I'd played around with slower shutter speeds," said Max. "I think that's part of what makes this a good picture - the snow is blurred. I just waited until the bison lifted its head and fired off a few shots."

Snow-plateau nomads by Shangzhen Fan, China


Winner 2019, Animals in Their Environment.

A small herd of male chiru are seen crossing a snow-covered slope in the Kumukuli Desert of China's Altun Shan National Nature Reserve. These antelope live at altitudes up 5,500m where temperatures can fall to -40C. "They like to get to the patches of bare sand because that's where it is warmest," says Shangzhen. The photographer took this image from a kilometre away. In the same sequence, he saw two bears moving across a ridge.

Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmos


NEW ARTICLE


Wednesday briefing: Has Johnson got a deal for EU?
Top story: PM lunges for border in Irish sea

Hello, I’m Warren Murray – thanks for giving the Briefing your time this morning.

Boris Johnson may be on the brink of reaching a Brexit deal with negotiating teams said to have agreed in principle that there will be a customs border down the Irish Sea. Amid the rush to find a deal for the EU27 leaders to sign off at Thursday’s European council summit, a draft text may be published on Wednesday if Downing Street gives the final green light, according to senior EU and British sources. The prime minister will brief his cabinet at 4pm before addressing a meeting of the Tory 1922 Committee. We are covering all the developments live.

If a deal does emerge, Johnson would probably try to pass it through parliament very quickly on a historic Saturday sitting. The PM will need almost all Conservatives, most of the former Tories from whom he withdrew the whip, and either the DUP or a bloc of about a dozen Labour MPs to get it through the Commons.

Two weeks before the UK’s scheduled withdrawal from the EU, the National Audit Office has concluded that a no-deal Brexit carries significant and unpredictable risks that could lead to chaos at the UK’s ports, more crime and fewer checks on migrants.

Midweek catch-up

> There have been rowdy scenes over the past few hours in Hong Kong where Carrie Lam, the chief executive, had to abandon an address to the legislature and deliver it by videolink instead because of fierce heckling by pro-democracy lawmakers.

Play Video 1:16 'Carrie Lam step down!' Hong Kong leader heckled in Legislative Council – video

> The largest primary debate in US history has taken place with Elizabeth Warren coming under sustained attack by Democratic rivals. Bernie Sanders, 78, the oldest candidate, thanked supporters after his heart attack two weeks ago. Joe Biden defended his son, Hunter, the subject of unsubstantiated claims promoted by Donald Trump. All candidates backed the impeachment inquiry into Trump’s presidency.

> Russian units now control former Kurdish-held territory separating Turkish-backed Syrian rebels from the army of Bashar al-Assad. Moscow has become the de facto power broker in north-east Syria after Kurds agreed to accept the protection of their former opponents.

> Clashes between protesters and police erupted in Barcelona over the jailing of nine Catalan separatist leaders. Protesters who lit fires and erected makeshift barricades were dispersed by police baton charges. There were similar scenes in the cities of Tarragona, Girona and Lleida where dozens of people were reportedly injured.

> Donald Trump has met with the parents Harry Dunn and told them the driver involved in the crash that killed him will not return to the UK to face proceedings. Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn said Trump shocked them by revealing that Anne Sacoolas was waiting in another room but they declined to meet her.

Row over Malta murder – A senior European monitor has listed a catalogue of alleged failings in the police investigation of the killing of the Maltese journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia. Known for her revelations about political corruption in Malta, Caruana Galizia was killed by a car bomb in October 2017. Police are being criticised for failing to strike a plea deal with one of three men awaiting trial, which could have unmasked other individuals behind the killing. Pieter Omtzigt, a special rapporteur for the Council of Europe, criticised the Maltese authorities: “Every time I ask sharp, factual questions about the case or request meetings, they refuse any answer and come up with all kinds of stories.”

Strange case of farmhouse hermits – Six people have been freed from a Dutch farmhouse where they are said to have lived in a cellar “waiting for the end of time”. Their reclusive existence came to light after one of the group, a man aged 25, walked into a bar in the local village and drank five beers. He said he had not been outside for nine years, had never been to school, and that he and his younger brothers and sisters “wanted to end the way they were living”.

Play Video 1:01 Drenthe residents react after Netherlands police discover family locked away for years – video

Six adults were removed and were being taken care of, said police, who found a secret staircase leading to the family’s hiding place behind a cupboard in the living room. A 58-year-old odd-job man who was renting the farmhouse was arrested after refusing to cooperate with police.

As seen on TV – Flat caps, black jumpsuits and slim-fit Levis have been flying off the shelves as shows like Peaky Blinders, Fleabag and Stranger Things influence what consumers are buying, John Lewis has reported. The retailer says the Marie Kondo effect has fuelled a 47% increase in sales of storage containers. The TV-inspired trends are revealed in the latest John Lewis retail report, an annual exercise in which the department store identifies the key trends of the year and the items that have passed their sell-by dates – a list that for 2019 includes drones and mantel clocks (there goes the Briefing’s Christmas re-gifting plans).

Today in Focus podcast: On the frontline in northern Syria

Martin Chulov, who covers the Middle East for the Guardian, has spent the past week on the frontline of north-east Syria. He describes the fallout from Trump’s shock decision to withdraw US troops. And: Amelia Gentleman on the EU citizens struggling for the right to remain in the UK.

Today in Focus On the frontline in northern Syria Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/10/15-76407-20191016_TIF_Syria.mp3 00:00:00 00:27:54

Lunchtime read: My nuanced feelings about #MeToo

“When a scandal broke involving the actor and comedian Aziz Ansari, I felt that my membership on Team Older Feminist was official,” writes Meghan Daum. “The older feminists scolded the younger ones for not being tough enough to take care of themselves. If the construction worker whistles at you, give him the finger! If the drunk guy sitting next to you at the wedding reception gets fresh, kick him in the shins! In turn, the youngsters chastised the oldsters for enabling the oppressive status quo. Neither side was entirely wrong, of course. But both sides were talking past each other in ways that suggested there was no meeting in the middle.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Illustration: Sarah Mazzetti

“In the New York Times, Daphne Merkin wrote of women and #MeToo: ‘Publicly, they say the right things … joining in the chorus of voices that applaud the takedown of maleficent characters who prey on vulnerable women in the workplace. In private it’s a different story. ‘Grow up, this is real life.’ On cable news, anchor Ashleigh Banfield looked down the camera and told ‘Grace’ (Katie Way, who wrote about her encounter with Ansari): ‘What you have done in my opinion is appalling.’ Wray retorted that Banfield was a ‘burgundy lipstick bad highlights second wave feminist has-been’ and that ‘no woman my age would ever watch your network’. As I watched all of this whiz past me on my computer screen, I wondered if my real problem with young feminists was how little they seemed to need us older ones. As far as I could see, they didn’t even want to know us.”

Sport

Jordan Henderson has admitted England’s players decided to play on in the face of racist abuse from Bulgarian supporters because they wanted their opponents and their fans to “suffer”. In the wake of the odious experience in Sofia, Borislav Mihaylov has resigned as president of the Bulgarian Football Union after the prime minister, Boyko Borissov, called for him to go because of the “racism and xenophobia”. Boris Johnson, meanwhile, has joined demands by anti-racism campaigners for Uefa to take strong action.

The Republic of Ireland need to beat Denmark to secure automatic qualification for the Euro 2020 finals after Switzerland got themselves right back into the race in Geneva. Only four of Eddie Jones’s England squad have played in a Rugby World Cup knockout game but prop Joe Marler is confident nerves will not be a problem in the weekend’s quarter-final against Australia. Liam Williams says Wales believe they can go all the way in Japan as they prepare for their quarter-final against France on Sunday. And Andy Murray won his first ATP Tour match in Europe for 16 months as he continued his encouraging return from hip surgery.

Business

Asian shares have inched higher while sterling came off five-month highs in volatile trade as investors looked to whether Britain can secure a Brexit deal with the EU. The news lit a fire under European and US equities, which jumped about 1% on Tuesday. The British pound rocketed to $1.28, a level not seen since 21 May, but lost steam in Asia to trade around $1.275 and €1.156. The FTSE is in negative territory ahead of the open.

The papers

Boris Johnson’s potentially imminent Brexit deal features on the front page of the Guardian: “Johnson close to a Brexit deal – now he has to sell it”, the Express: “PM: I’ll strike a deal that’s best for Britain”, the Telegraph: “Johnson prepares to unveil Brexit deal” and the FT: “Johnson pressed to yield more ground in race to find Brexit deal”. Though the Times says even if the deal can be agreed it might not be finalised until next year: “Johnson hit by prospect of no Brexit until 2020”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Guardian front page, Wednesday 16 October 2019.

The Mirror reports on the racist abuse at the football in Bulgaria: “Ambushed”, while the i leads with an investigation into PFI projects: “Taxpayer PFI deals out of control”. The Sun has a story about Tafida Raqeeb flying to Italy for treatment: “Flight for life” and the Mail’s splash is: “Breast test in your lunch hour”, about a report that calls for easier access to mammograms and cervical tests.

Sign up

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.

For more news: www.theguardian.com


NEW ARTICLE


Harry Dunn parents: Trump shocked us by revealing Sacoolas was in next room
British parents grieving their teenage son have told how, during a visit to the White House on Tuesday, Donald Trump dropped the “bombshell” that the woman who allegedly killed him in a road crash was waiting for them in an adjoining room.

Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn turned down the rushed offer to meet Anne Sacoolas, who is married to a US diplomat, describing it as “not appropriate” with no mediators or therapists present.

Their son, Harry Dunn, 19, died in August in a head-on collision between his motorcycle and a car being driven on the wrong side of the road, according to Northamptonshire police in the UK. Sacoolas was allegedly driving the car and, claiming diplomatic immunity, flew back to the US.

Trump tells Harry Dunn’s parents that envoy’s wife will not be sent to UK Read more

Dunn’s parents travelled to New York this week to urge Sacoolas to return and engage with a police investigation. They were surprised to receive an abrupt invitation to the White House in Washington on Tuesday – and even more taken aback by the offer that came without prior warning from Trump, a former reality TV host.

“The bombshell was dropped soon after we walked in the room: Anne Sacoolas was in the building and was willing to meet with us,” Charles told reporters after the meeting, which lasted 10 to 15 minutes. “We made it very clear that, as we’ve said all along, we will meet with her and we would still love to meet with her but it has to be on our terms and on UK soil.”

She continued: “We were a bit shocked but it didn’t really make any difference to us, to be perfectly honest. She could have been two miles away; it’s just she was in the room next door. Our grief’s been locked in for several weeks. It’s not appropriate to meet her without therapists and mediators for us as a family but also for her. How can it be comfortable for her to be thrown into a situation like that without therapists and mediators?”

Asked if they regarded the plan as a “stunt”, Dunn hesitated before replying: “No, I don’t think so. I would think maybe they were trying to force it on to us but I still think the president was sincere at the end when he spoke to Charlotte.”

At first, Trump also flatly ruled out any possibility of Sacoolas returning to the UK, without giving a reason, but he signalled a possible shift later in the conversation. Dunn’s parents also praised his warm and compassionate manner, noting that he held Charles’s hand.

Speaking outside the White House, Charles recalled: “When we first got there, he extended his condolences to us, which did feel sincere. I don’t suppose we would have expected anything else. Many of his staff also did the same on the way in.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Tim Dunn and Charlotte Charles speak during a interview in Manhattan on Tuesday. Photograph: Eduardo Muñoz/Reuters

“We then went round in circles a little bit because I think they were trying desperately to get us to not give in to accept the invitation to meet her on their terms, which we weren’t willing to do.

“So, upon leaving the meeting and ending the meeting, I said, ‘If it was your 19-year-old son, or your son no matter what age, you would be doing the same as me.’ And he actually grabbed hold of my hand little bit tighter and he said, ‘Yes, I would be. Maybe we’ll try and push this from a different angle.’

“There’s that tiny little bit of hope that he will take another look and maybe work harder for us.”

The episode has provoked an outcry in the UK but received less attention in the US, where Trump is facing impeachment and multiple other distractions.

Boris Johnson has said Sacoolas should return to Britain, insisting: “I do not think that it can be right to use the process of diplomatic immunity for this type of purpose.” But a photograph of briefing notes held by Trump at recent event indicated that “the spouse of the US government employee will not return to the United Kingdom”.

Asked if she felt the parents had made progress since arriving in America, Charles said: “I feel like we’ve got a little bit of progress. We didn’t get the answers that we wanted. They couldn’t tell us who made the decision to let her come back to the US. We asked how long she was there for; they still state it was three weeks; we’re not totally sure about that. And I think paperwork needs to be shown to prove that somehow.”

But she said her son would have been “proud” of his parents taking his case all the way to the White House and meeting the US president. “He was always one to stand up for his rights when he knew he was in the right,” she said.

“He would do everything that he could possibly do to make sure that he had that heard, anyone that he felt was being served any injustice ... he would have their back. He would be really proud and he’s riding the skies up there now and pushing us on to continue to do him proud and more than anything now do his twin brother proud and his siblings.”

Charles and Dunn will remain in the US for a few days and still have questions for the UK’s foreign office, including what date Sacoolas returned to the US and who made that decision. Charles said: “We still want justice for Harry and we will take it as far as we possibly can to ensure that that’s done. We do feel at this stage I think that we’ve pretty much done as much as we can at the moment.”

A statement previously released on Sacoolas’s behalf said she spoke with authorities at the scene of the accident and again the following day and would continue to cooperate with them. It said: “Anne is devastated by this tragic accident. No loss compares to the death of a child and Anne extends her deepest sympathy to Harry Dunn’s family.”


NEW ARTICLE


Malta's police 'may have turned down evidence' in journalist's murder
A senior European monitor has raised serious concerns about the police investigation into the killing of the Maltese journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia.

Speaking to the Guardian on the second anniversary of Caruana Galizia’s death, Pieter Omtzigt, a special rapporteur for the Council of Europe, listed a catalogue of alleged failings and said he was concerned the authorities may have turned down evidence that could lead to those who commissioned the killing.

“Individual officers may be doing their best, but the approach of the police force as a whole, and of the politicians responsible for it, does not match the prime minister’s promise to leave no stone unturned,” Omtzigt said.

A member of the Dutch parliament, Omtzigt was appointed to monitor the case last year by the Council of Europe, a human rights body whose assembly consists of elected representatives from 42 states, ranging from the UK to Russia.

Caruana Galizia, known for her revelations about political corruption in Malta, was killed by a car bomb near her home on 16 October 2017. Three men accused of planting and triggering the explosive are awaiting trial. They were arrested weeks after the incident, but it is suspected the killing was ordered by individuals who are still at large.

Play Video 5:01 How was Daphne Caruana Galizia murdered? – video

Among the failings identified by Omtzigt is the failure so far to agree a plea deal with one of the alleged hitmen, Vincent Muscat, who has spoken to police about a supposed intermediary.

“I am concerned that the authorities may have turned down evidence that could lead to whoever ordered the murder,” Omtzigt said. “And I am also worried that neither Mr Muscat, nor his lawyer, nor others who may be concerned by this situation – including the alleged intermediary – have been provided with adequate protection.”

Over the weekend, the Times of Malta reported anonymous claims that Muscat was in discussions with the attorney general for a reduced sentence in exchange for his testimony. However, Muscat’s lawyers are said to be concerned he could be harmed in a revenge attack while in prison.

He is being held alongside his alleged accomplices at the Corradino correctional facility, and is reported to be in fear for his life and reluctant to eat prison food.

Omtzigt raised further concerns, including the delayed removal of a senior officer from the case despite a conflict of interest; the refusal of a copy of Caruana Galizia’s laptop from German police, who had obtained the data; a complaint by the former head of Europol about unsatisfactory cooperation from the Maltese police; and anonymous briefings to journalists about imminent breakthroughs that turned out to be false.

Meanwhile, the rapporteur’s efforts to monitor the case have led to verbal attacks from Malta’s prime minister and fears for his own safety.

On the advice of the Netherlands’ secret service, Omtzigt was accompanied by armed plain clothes officers, assigned by the Maltese authorities, when he visited the country.

A veteran investigator, he has produced reports on corruption and bribery by the Azerbaijan government and on mass surveillance by the US and other countries, but this is the first time he has required police protection.

Malta attempted in September 2018 to have Omtzigt removed as rapporteur, but this was rejected. Malta raised concerns about the politician’s handling of an investigation into the shooting down of Malaysian airlines flight MH17 over Ukraine in 2014.

Malta’s prime minister, Joseph Muscat, has used press conferences to question Omtzigt’s credibility. He described the rapporteur as having “serious credibility deficits” and of having told “lies” in relation to a previous investigation. Omtzigt rejects those claims.

Senior members of Muscat’s investigation have refused meetings requested by Omtzigt.

“Every time I ask sharp, factual questions about the case or request meetings, they refuse any answer and come up with all kinds of stories,” Omtzigt told the Guardian.

A bomb silenced Daphne Caruana Galizia. But her investigation lives on Read more

Caruana Galizia’s murder sent shockwaves across Europe and focused a spotlight on allegations by politicians in the European parliament that the rule of law has deteriorated sharply in the small Mediterranean country.

The journalist’s most significant investigations stemmed from the Panama Papers, a leak of documents from the archives of the offshore law firm Mossack Fonseca.

Omtzigt said he was also concerned about the absence of any request to the Latvian authorities to produce bank account information which could relate to the case. Among Caruana Galizia’s most important investigations was the revelation that two members of Malta’s current Labour government had acquired secretive Panama registered companies soon after taking office. Material leaked from the Panama Papers suggests those companies were due to receive payments from another entity, called 17 Black, with an account at Latvia’s now defunct ABLV bank.

“Even in Mongolia, people who were exposed in the Panama Papers had to resign,” said Omtzigt. “Everywhere, people resigned. Except Malta. Malta is the only exception we can find.”

The prime minister’s office and Malta police did not respond to requests for comment.


NEW ARTICLE


Hong Kong leader forced to deliver key address via video after lawmakers protest
Carrie Lam was interrupted twice by angry pro-democracy politicians, who shouted her down during the annual speech

Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam was forced to abandon her annual policy address on Wednesday after some lawmakers jeered as she began speaking, causing an unprecedented cancellation of the speech in the legislature of the Chinese-ruled city.

Lam, who has rejected calls to stand down, had been set to announce a raft of property initiatives, in a bid to restore confidence in her administration after more than four months of anti-government protests.

She was forced to deliver the address via video instead.

Pro-democracy lawmakers shouted “five demands, not one less” as they heckled Lam, who faces immense pressure to regain trust and resolve the city’s biggest political crisis in decades, in a disruption that forced the meeting to be adjourned twice.

China warns against 'meddling' as US House passes bill backing Hong Kong protesters Read more

The expression has become one of the movement’s rallying calls, referring to protesters’ five main demands, which include universal suffrage and an independent inquiry into what they say has been excessive force by police in dealing with demonstrations.

Some of the lawmakers wore masks of Chinese President Xi Jinping inside the chamber as they held up posters calling for the five demands to be met.

Pro-democracy legislator Tanya Chan said Lam was to blame for causing Hong Kong*s chaos and suffering over the past four months.

“Both her hands are soaked with blood,” an emotional Chan told a news conference after the policy session.

“We hope Carrie Lam withdraws and quits. She has no governance ability, she is not suitable to be chief executive.”

Security was very tight ahead of Lam’s third policy address, with riot police stationed outside and water cannon on standby.

She was speaking hours after the US House of Representatives passed three pieces of legislation related to the Hong Kong protests, drawing a swift rebuke from Beijing, which accused the lawmakers of “sinister intentions” of undermining stability in the Asian financial hub.

One of the measures, the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act, would require the US secretary of state to certify every year that Hong Kong retained its autonomy in order to keep receiving the special treatment that has allowed it to be a major financial center.

Lam has ruled out making any concessions to the protesters in the face of escalating unrest, saying, “Violence would only breed more violence.”


NEW ARTICLE


Oxford professor accused of selling ancient Bible fragments
An Oxford University professor has been accused of selling ancient Bible fragments to a controversial US company that has been involved in several high-profile scandals related to its aggressive purchases of biblical artefacts.

Dirk Obbink, one of the world’s most celebrated classics professors, has been named after an investigation by staff associated with Oxford’s Oxyrhynchus Papyri project.

He is accused of selling without permission a number of ancient fragments to the US arts and crafts chain Hobby Lobby. Its owners, the Green family, are prominent Christian evangelicals and, under the guidance of the Hobby Lobby president, Steve Green, were behind the founding of Washington’s $400m Museum of the Bible in 2017.

A statement published by the Egypt Exploration Society, which manages the Papyri project, claimed it was told by the Museum of the Bible that 11 fragments were sold to it by Obbink in two batches in 2010.

The society and the university confirmed Obbink was under investigation. He continues to be employed at Oxford. The Guardian has contacted him for comment.

The lecturer in papyrology and Greek literature has previously denied some of the allegations, telling the Daily Beast in 2018 that the claim he sold a fragment of the first chapter of the gospel of Mark to Hobby Lobby was not true.

In its statement, the Egypt Exploration Society, which owns the collection and conducted the investigation, said the issue had contributed to Obbink’s removal as general editor of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri project “because of unsatisfactory discharge of his editorial duties, but also because of concerns, which he did not allay, about his alleged involvement in the marketing of ancient texts”.

It added: “In June 2019 the [society] banned him from any access to its collection pending his satisfactory clarification of the 2013 contract [for another fragment sale]. Oxford University is now investigating, with [the society’s help], the removal from university premises and alleged sale of [society] texts.”

The statement said file records relating to the missing fragments had also been removed. “These texts were taken without authorisation from the EES, and in most of the 13 cases the catalogue card and photograph are also missing.”

The statement follows intensive investigations after reports in the Daily Beast this year speculated about the possibility that Obbink had sold a highly prized fragment – if it is real – of the gospel of Mark to Hobby Lobby and the Green family.

The report quoted a blogpost by the New Testament scholar Brent Nongbri, who published an email sent by Michael Holmes of the Museum of the Bible appearing to confirm that “Obbink sold [the fragment of Mark] and three other allegedly early gospel fragments to the Green collection”, adding a copy of the contract.

Commenting after the statement on Monday, Nongbri said: “The sale of the manuscripts and the attempt to cover it up by removing records is almost unbelievable. But the first thing to note are the words ‘so far’. We don’t yet know the full extent of this. More items may well have been sold to Hobby Lobby.”

The Green family and Steve Green have been embroiled in multiple scandals over the long-running programme of purchasing biblical fragments for the Museum of the Bible. According to the Egypt Exploration Society, its investigations have revealed that 13 pieces in the museum’s collection are in fact the rightful property of the nonprofit society.

In a statement, the Museum of the Bible said the antiquities were “sold illegally” by a “known expert”, adding that of the 13 items identified, only four were the property of the museum, with the remainder belonging to Hobby Lobby as part of the Green collection.

The Green family has assembled what it describes as one of the largest collections of biblical antiquities in the world, many of which are on display in the Museum of the Bible.

However, the Greens and the museum have been dogged by controversy over the provenance of some of its acquisitions. In June 2017, Hobby Lobby Stores was ordered to pay a $3m fine for illegally importing thousands of ancient Iraqi artefacts that were falsely labelled and shipped to the company through the United Arab Emirates and Israel.

Commenting after that case Hobby Lobby said it “did not fully appreciate the complexities of the acquisitions process” and relied on dealers who did not understand how to properly ship the items.

In a second high-profile controversy, the Green family and the Museum of the Bible were forced to remove five document fragments – described as part of the Dead Sea Scrolls – when they were identified as modern forgeries after reporting by the Guardian and other media organisations.


NEW ARTICLE


Twitter lays out rules for world leaders amid pressure to rein in Trump
Blogpost sheds new light on how tweets will be treated but is unlikely to satisfy those calling for Trump’s censorship

Twitter on Tuesday published additional information about how it plans to act if a world leader tweets something that violates its rules. The update follows the announcement in June of a policy whereby the company would choose not to delete tweets by major political figures that violated the company’s rules if the company decided it was in the public interest.

Since the election of Donald Trump, Twitter has been in the unenviable position of having the ability to censor the president of the United States on the very platform where he is the most unguarded. It has largely resisted the intense pressure to do so, even when it seemed that Trump’s tweets might have fallen afoul of Twitter’s rules if they had been sent by anyone else.

In September 2017, after Trump appeared to threaten the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, on Twitter, the company announced that it had begun considering “newsworthiness” when considering whether to take down a tweet. Trump also faced intense criticism for a tweet in which he arguably encouraged violence against CNN and for amplifying racist misinformation by British hate figures.

Kamala Harris urges Twitter to suspend Trump over 'civil war' tweets Read more

The June 2019 policy allowed for a scenario in which a world leader’s tweet was bad enough to come down but merited remaining up for documentation or accountability. In these scenarios, Twitter said today, the company will apply a label to the offending tweet and users will not be allowed to like, retweet or share it.

Social media platforms have come under additional pressure to rein Trump in since the September launch of an impeachment inquiry and the concurrent escalation in belligerent rhetoric from his personal Twitter account and campaign Facebook account.

Senator Elizabeth Warren has pressured Facebook to reverse a decision to allow Trump (and other politicians) to run ads that include false statements. Meanwhile, in September, the Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris wrote to Twitter’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey, calling on him to suspend Trump’s account over six tweets containing “blatant threats” against the anonymous Ukraine whistleblower and an invocation of the threat of “civil war”. (The letter was issued on the letterhead of Harris’s campaign, not her US Senate office.)

Today’s blogpost by Twitter provides insight into why the company is unlikely to concede to Harris’s request. It also includes more detail about how Twitter plans to approach such a scenario, though it does not establish any clear red lines.

Twitter Safety (@TwitterSafety) Our goal is to enforce our rules judiciously and impartially. In doing so, we aim to provide direct insight into our enforcement decision-making, to serve public conversation, and protect the public’s right to hear from their leaders and to hold them to account.

“We recognize the desire for these decisions to be clearcut yes/no binaries,” the company wrote. “This is new territory for everyone – a service being used by world leaders to communicate directly to their constituents or other leaders, and at times, announce policy – and every decision we make sets a new precedent.”

The company said that it will be more likely to simply delete a tweet by a world leader if it promotes terrorism, violence or self-harm; involves illegal goods or services; is intended to interfere with elections (such as by posting misinformation about voting); or includes the private information of another person – especially if that person is not a public figure.

Twitter said that it would be more likely to allow a violating tweet to remain published if it violates rules against hate speech, hateful conduct, abuse or harassment; or if it contains graphic or gruesome media.

“Twitter stands for the value of direct access to government and elected officials, and maintaining a robust public record provides benefits to accountability,” the company said. “This value will be weighed against the severity of the harm associated with the violation of these policies and the likelihood of offline harm.”


NEW ARTICLE


John Lewis says small screen having big effect on sales
The sofa has become the new fashion front row, with cult television shows such as Peaky Blinders, Fleabag and Stranger Things heavily influencing what consumers bought in the past year.

The return of charismatic Birmingham gangster Tommy Shelby in BBC One’s Peaky Blinders sent sales of flat caps up by a quarter in John Lewis, while Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s elegant anti-hero resulted in a “Fleabag effect” with sales of black jumpsuits up 66%. Devotees of the 1980s-set Netflix hit Stranger Things sought to emulate the show’s retro styling, with sales of slim fit Levi’s up 8%.

The TV-inspired trends are revealed in the latest John Lewis retail report, an annual exercise in which the department store identifies the key trends of the year and the items that have passed their sell-by dates – a list that for 2019 includes drones and mantel clocks.

Another example of the small screen having an impact on shoppers was in homewares, where Britons rushed to buy decluttering paraphernalia after watching Tidying Up with Marie Kondo. The lifestyle guru, who encourages people to purge clothes that don’t “spark joy” and to fold and box up the ones that do, fuelled a 47% increase in sales of storage containers.

The report’s seventh edition comes at a difficult time for the employee-owned retailer which is part of the same group as Waitrose. The company slumped to its first ever half-year loss last month as weak consumer spending was compounded by rising costs. It has announced it is merging the management of the department stores and the supermarkets to cut costs.

Tough economic times often result in the so-called “lipstick effect” – when shoppers reduce spending on expensive designer items but splurge on cheaper luxuries instead – and the report says sales are 16% higher than last year.

John Lewis’s trading director, Simon Coble, said the report helped it to adapt its ranges and “remain relevant to customers’ lives”. This year, the study revealed greater concern about the environment, especially single-use plastic. Travel mugs and reusable water bottles are now considered standard issue and shoppers are experimenting with collapsible coffee cups, reusable beeswax sandwich wrappers and travel cutlery. Sales of carry-around knives and forks, to use instead of plastic versions, are up 176%.

The decision to ban plastic straws and drink stirrers from sale in England next year has pushed sales of reusable versions up more than 1500%, with shoppers buying cheaper stainless steel ones or splashing out on silver, which come in a carry case and cost £8.

Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk

In a possible sign that the political turmoil is taking its toll on the population, John Lewis said sales of Lego sets aimed at adults were up by a quarter. The toymaker has released a mindfulness book called Build Yourself Happy: The Joy of Lego Play and construction projects range from the Central Perk café from the sitcom Friends to a Vestas wind turbine.

Many of the products that are on their way out have fallen foul to advances in technology. Sales of landline phones have nearly halved in five years while camcorders are practically a “non-existent” market, it said. Sales of mantel clocks are in freefall, usurped by smartphones and voice controlled speakers.

The store has also stopped selling drones after sales plummeted in the wake of the drone attack that disrupted Gatwick airport last Christmas.


NEW ARTICLE


Budge up, great white males! MoMA goes global with an explosive $450m rehang
In his Poetics, Aristotle argued that poetry was a more scientific and serious genre than history. This was because, he said, history is concerned only with individual and particular events. Poetry, on the other hand, is concerned with what might happen: that is, deep and general truths. In the newly revamped Museum of Modern Art in New York, which reopens on 21 October, the march of history, at least as it has been understood by MoMA in recent decades, is out and poetry is in.

Inside the refreshed museum – its gallery space enlarged by 30% thanks to architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro – a radical rehang reverses the museum’s old “Book of Genesis” approach, as MoMA director Glenn D Lowry characterised it. Recent decades have seen the museum organised by way of a stately procession, in which art movements and -isms were shown to have begotten other movements and -isms.

This lucid, but necessarily sealed-off, worldview has now been replaced with the kind of thematic approach familiar to British audiences from two decades of Tate Modern hangs. While still arranged according to a broad chronology, beginning with the 1880s on the fifth floor and descending to the present on the second, MoMA’s individual rooms are organised around ideas, with titles such as War Within, War Without, Inner and Outer Space, and True Stories.

The view of art history on show here is no longer one of straight lines and linear progressions, but one much more like the complex ripples set in motion by pebbles thrown into a pond. No longer will MoMA claim to tell a single story of modern and contemporary art. Every six months, the hang will substantially change.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Into orbit … The Moon, 1928, by pioneering female modernist Tarsila do Amaral. Photograph: Robert Gerhardt/MoMA

Some might say MoMA is letting itself off the hook: no definitive statements are made and everything is allowed to hover provisionally until the next remix. Lowry argues it is returning to the museum’s founding principles. The great first director, Alfred H Barr Jr, wrote: “Nothing that the visitors will see in the exhibition galleries, neither the works of art, nor the lighting fixtures, nor even the partitions, is at present permanent.”

Barr understood, said Lowry, “that the museum was to be a work in progress, changing and evolving as the world of contemporary art changed and evolved”. The museum’s glaciation of its displays came later, in the 1960s and 70s, he said. Nevertheless, even in the brave indeterminate future, there will remain a few constants. Some works – Monet’s Water Lilies, Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon – will always be there. “We’d have a revolution if we took down the Water Lilies,” said Ann Temkin, chief curator of painting and sculpture, at a museum preview.

Underlying the new mix-it-up approach is the argument that teleological art history – seeing the present as the logical culmination of the past – lacks contingency, fails to take into account the idea that once upon a time Cézanne, say, was just a bloke making strange paintings in the south of France, not an art history colossus whose work had a mind-blowing market value. So the new hang is not a “bang, bang, bang” of famous masterpiece after famous masterpiece, as Temkin phrased it. While we spoke, we were sitting with our backs to Cézanne’s The Bather, newly cleaned, with zingy blue details revealed of its background of rocks and water. To our right were Van Gogh’s Starry Night and Henri Rousseau’s The Dream. So far, so “bang, bang, bang”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Van Gogh, Cézanne and Rousseau now hang near ceramics by the ‘mad potter of Biloxi’ George Ohr. Photograph: Jonathan Muzikar

But in a case in front of us was a selection of exquisite, earth-toned ceramics by American George Ohr, the self-styled “mad potter of Biloxi”. You could argue that these modest pots made in obscurity in Mississippi are irrelevant to the masterpieces of French post-impressionism. The point, according to Temkin, is to try to bring us back to around 1890 – when Van Gogh was painting in an asylum, Rousseau was collecting taxes, and no one knew what would be inscribed into the canon and what wouldn’t. Above all, she explained, the connections are visual. Gesturing at the warm-brown ceramics, she said: “You could almost make a Cézanne out of those colours.”

Repudiating the Book of Genesis approach involves breaking up the patriarchal parade of white, male artists. So in a room titled Stamp, Scavenge, Crush – which centres on art using discarded or reused materials from the late 1940s to the early 60s, and features Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg and Cy Twombly – are also a photographic work by the African American Romare Bearden and a bedsheet printed by Ruth Asawa in 1948 with a stamp to create a dense, graphic pattern. (

She was using the Black Mountain College laundry stamp – she was running the art school’s laundry at the time, while learning about design and pattern from ex-Bauhaus masters such as Anni Albers.) Twenty-eight per cent of works now on view at MoMA are by women, a crushingly small proportion even taking into account the fact that 13% can’t neatly be assigned to a gender (because they are by collectives, for example). But 28% is still five times as high as the proportion in the galleries at the beginning of the century.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Fragile strength … Prison Notebook, 1976, by Ibrahim el-Salahi. Photograph: Robert Gerhardt/MoMA

This rebalancing has meant enlarging the collection – a process enabled by MoMA’s considerable resources and the tradition of American philanthropy along with its ability to sell off works in order to buy new ones. (British national museums’ constitutions prevent them from doing this.) Selling a Léger meant, Temkin explained, that the museum could purchase several works by “pioneering female modernists”. One, The Moon (1928), by Brazilian painter Tarsila do Amaral, acquired earlier this year, now holds court alongside Picasso, Brâncuși and Eileen Gray. Donations include the extraordinarily extensive and coherent Cisneros collection of Latin American art, which for the time being will be shown as a kind of museum-within-a-museum. A wall of shimmeringly delicate wire sculptures by the Venezuelan Gego are a particular joy.

The labels beside works, specifically their date of acquisition, tell a story in themselves about recent innovations at MoMA. A wooden sculpture by Lebanon’s Saloua Raouda Choucair entered the collection last year. A set of works by Polish artist Edward Krasiński came in 2015. Ibrahim el-Salahi’s Prison Notebook, illustrated with ink drawings, made after he was wrongfully imprisoned in Sudan in 1975, was acquired in 2017. Despite its fragility and scale, it holds its own in a room themed around the conflicts of the 1970s opposite Philip Guston’s magisterial painting Deluge II, made at the same time. A dangling, curvaceous hemp sculpture by Indian artist Mrinalini Mukherjee was also acquired in 2017. Perhaps my eyes are drawn to familiar things, or perhaps it is just that curators in London and New York breathe the same air, but it strikes me that these last are all artists foregrounded by Tate Modern in current displays or recent exhibitions. At any rate, the message is loud and clear: the world is a big place, bigger than Manhattan and Paris – and great art is being made all around it.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest ‘We’d have a revolution if we took down Water Lilies’ … Monet at MoMA. Photograph: Kurt Heumiller/Museum of Modern Art, New York

These themed rooms frequently draw on items from several of the institution’s mighty departments, creating a mix of, for example, photography, film, publications and painting. So for example, in the room with Asawa’s bedsheet there is a film of Merce Cunningham’s dance work Antic Meet – like a lot of film in the galleries, simply projected on to a wall, offered as part of the mix. One of the most rewarding moments in the current hang is a modest, unobtrusive room devoted to Frank O’Hara – from his manuscripts and early editions of books to artworks made by a host of greats to illustrate his work, and Larry Rivers’s portrait of the poet.

All this has meant delving deep into the collection. Lowry said the museum had, to his eyes, become almost like two institutions in recent years – one that visitors had access to, and the other in store, where there was a much more varied and diverse set of art. A work by the Indian painter VS Gaitonde, for example, was purchased in 1963, and languished unseen for years – now, though, it’s sharing wall space with Rothko. There is an entire case of radical zines and leaflets mailed to the museum in the early 1980s from Brazil – these items, from the Movimento de Arte Pornò, were unsought by the institution but dutifully catalogued and preserved.

Some things, on the other hand, have been permanently banished from the galleries. Like Tate before it, MoMA will no longer bandy around terms such as cubism, post-impressionism, abstract expressionism, or conceptualism in its labels. “We were trying to imagine what we would say if we had a group of friends over to dinner who aren’t in the art world,” Lowry told me. “What would we want them to know? What would they need to know in order to have an interesting conversation?” It is certainly not, he argued, a “dumbing down”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest American People Series #20: Die, 1967, by Faith Ringgold. Photograph: Jonathan Muzikar/MoMA

The results of this particular innovation are, at this point, mixed – after all, you can eradicate art-world lingo and still bypass lucidity. Sometimes, refusing the actual word seems like a round-in-the-hat game – in which participants pull a name out of a hat and describe it, without using the name itself. The introductory text of one room, titled Readymade in Paris and New York, seems, for example, to be a more or less a hat-game description of the word dada. Indeed, hanging beside it is Richard Boix’s drawing of members of the New York dada group (Man Ray, Duchamp, Katherine Dreier and others), with the word DADA writ large on it. But since the room introduction doesn’t tell you what dada is, you’d be none the wiser if you didn’t already know.

All of these changes have been a long time coming. Back at the turn of the millennium, soon after Lowry was appointed, the museum experimented with a series of thematic displays called MoMA 2000. Some critics loved them; some utterly rejected them. Lowry denies the museum rowed back after the mixed reception, but, rather, the displays marked the beginning of a process that has culminated in this month’s reopening, one that involved great institutional change. “It required over time a new generation of curators who came with fresh and new ideas and for whom interdisciplinarity was something natural. And we had to expand on training our vision,” he said. Over the last decade, research groups on Asian, Latin American and African art have been formed at the museum. Curators have travelled more. The great MoMA tanker has gradually turned.

Unsealing the edges of modern and contemporary art in this way has, said Temkin, been “liberating, exhilarating. One thing I’ve been insisting on is changing the way people speak about gaps in the collection. It feels so wrong because it assumes there is a complete puzzle, and if we just find every single puzzle piece, one day it will be solved and complete. Right now, we are saying, ‘No, we don’t know – there is no way of knowing some complete art history.’”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Work by Duchamp, Man Ray, Richard Boix and others in the Readymade in Paris and New York room. Photograph: Denis Doorly/MoMA

The museum, once a place of such authority, is now letting that authority go, admitting the impossibility of a fully coherent narrative, embracing the fact that it cannot tell the viewer everything. Strangely, its sleek and efficient spaces, so four-square, pale and elegant, renewed and enlarged at a cost of $450m (£356m), seem slightly at odds with this new intellectual porousness, despite architect Elizabeth Diller’s efforts to make it more friendly and open. It remains an intensely decorous, formal, demure museum (and it is $25 for a ticket, though the ground-floor displays, which currently include a room of paintings by Kenya-born Michael Armitage, can be visited for free). Perhaps a longing for unruliness was why I was so happy to see the holes punched out of the walls, revealing the grubby plywood sheets and dust balls lurking behind them, in a display devoted to the multidisciplinary performance artist Pope.L.

The most striking example of MoMA’s new approach – as well as a relatively rare abjuration of broad chronology – is placing Picasso’s Demoiselles d’Avignon beside a visceral painting, by African American artist Faith Ringgold, documenting the 1965 Los Angeles race riots. (The 1967 work, American People Series #20: Die, was seen at Tate Modern in the 2017 exhibition Soul of a Nation.) The formal consonances between the works, made 60 years apart, are clear. MoMA’s contention is that the Picasso might illuminate the Ringgold – but also that the Ringgold might illuminate the Picasso. History, in other words, might not be working in only one direction. Which is where poetry comes in. Or, depending on your perspective and taste, the chaos.


NEW ARTICLE


Team older feminist: am I allowed nuanced feelings about #MeToo?
After #MeToo, I wondered if my real problem with young feminists was how little they seemed to need us older ones. As far as I could see, they didn’t even want to know us

I remember a woman who screamed like a feral animal. She was leather tan and sinewy. Spiked bleached blonde hair, sculpted biceps, low-slung cargo pants with Doc Martens, veins bursting from her neck, eyes bugging from her drawn face.

She stood on the sidewalks of New York City with a folding table covered with poster-size images from hardcore pornography: women wearing dog collars, women on leashes, women leaned over and viewed from behind, their backs crosshatched with scars. Much of the time she displayed a blowup of the famous Hustler magazine cover showing a naked woman being fed upside down into a meat grinder.

“This is what your husbands are masturbating to,” she shouted in a barking monotone. “Wake up, women! Don’t be passive! Sign the petition!”

Most everyone turned away or just kept walking. This was back in 1990. I was 20.

To be 20 years old in 1990 in New York City was, as far as I was concerned, to own the world. I owned practically nothing of material value back then, but somehow this was all part of a magical transaction in which I knew I’d eventually get ahead even if it seemed, for the moment, like I could barely keep up. The city was still a wild kingdom, a stone-and-steel fortress with rage burning inside. The crack epidemic was long under way and also a long way from ending. Aids was everywhere – ravaging the bodies of the visibly ill and beckoning from public service announcements that preached condoms or death. The graffiti was only beginning to come off the subway cars.

Every man, woman and, yes, many children (including those commuting to fancy prep schools) had been mugged or knew someone who had. Every woman knew what it was like to be creepily rubbed against by some dude in a crowded space, and when this happened many of us either jammed our elbows into his abdomen or rolled our eyes and moved away.

One time, as I walked down a mostly empty Columbus Avenue around midnight, a man walked up to me – a redheaded, bearded man perhaps 10 years my senior – reached his hand out, and shoved me just below my left collarbone. It was a fairly hard shove, and I almost lifted my arm to shove him back. Instead, the moment passed and I just looked at him in disgust and confusion as we both continued along our way. I remember feeling grateful that the situation hadn’t escalated into anything worse.

What I don’t remember is connecting the incident to anything like what would now be called institutionalized misogyny. This was not systemic oppression of women. This was simply life in the big city.

Today, the angry, ranting woman with the folding table is gone from the sidewalk. In her place are millions of angry women marching in the streets and, even more so, ranting online. We are tiny pixels coalescing into a giant portrait of rage in all its definitions.

Twenty years after the redheaded man shoved me on Columbus Avenue, men were going down like bowling pins against the unstoppable forces of #MeToo. What could you call the fall of 2017 other than the Fall of the Fall of Man. It was a season of hurricanes and rapid soil erosion, namely the mudslide that began with Harvey Weinstein and quickly pulled more men down with it than anyone could reasonably keep up with.

Or maybe that’s the wrong metaphor. Maybe it wasn’t a mudslide as much as a giant oil spill from the tanker on which contemporary western society had been carrying its assumptions about male behavior. Like fossil fuels themselves, this behavior had long been construed as a necessary evil, one for which any purported cure seemed as futile and flimsy as a reusable shopping bag. (Hit him with your stiletto if he gets handsy! Make him get in touch with his feelings! Pry his eyes open and force him to read the Scum Manifesto!)

I’m not going to even try to summarize the events of that fall or list the men who went down in the spill of #MeToo. Entire books will be written about that movement, the best of which probably can’t be embarked upon until enough years have passed to allow authors even a modicum of perspective. What I can tell you about the fall of 2017 is that it coincided with a downward slope of my youth that was far steeper than I had any grasp of at the time.

The autumn of 2017 marked my second year back in New York City after being away for the better part of two decades, most of it in California. Though I’d left California in 2015 in the wake of irremediable, if mercifully amicable, marital separation, it had taken nearly two years to officially get divorced, and this new status carried a sting whose effects sometimes proved paralytic. How could I have imagined that replacing the license plates on your car could feel like a death? (Somehow I’d managed to keep my car registered in California until the last possible minute.) Who knew that shopping for a new health insurance policy could make you feel like you’re on a plastic pool raft floating aimlessly in the Dead Sea? (OK, I guess everyone knows that.)

I’d left New York when I was nearly 30. I was now 47. Whereas my chief experience of the city was that of a young woman, I was now faced with re-entering it as a middle-aged one.

It wasn’t just that I had been young in New York; New York was my youth. It was the place where I’d spent my entire 20s. It was the place where I figured out what kind of person I wanted to be. That’s a different thing from actually figuring out how to be that person, and it took leaving New York to accomplish that task, but as they like to say in California, setting your intention is the most important phase of the journey.

New York was the backdrop for my earliest triumphs and stupidities. It was the first and last place I ever lived where on any given night you could step outside and feel like absolutely anything could happen, that the course of your life could shift like a subway train switching from the local track to the express.

It was the place where I had my first real job, my first grown-up boyfriend, my first martini, my first call from a debt collector, my first call from a hospital pay phone telling me someone was in serious trouble. It was the site of my earliest rough drafts and rough treatments, the ones visited upon me as well as the ones I inflicted on others. Now that I had returned, it was as if my 20s were being handed back to me in used condition. What a strange remnant to hold in your hand; what a bittersweet walk down memory’s plank.

Here I was again, a girl alone and on the town. I was my most primordial self, a girl who was rabidly ambitious in some ways but inexplicably lazy in others. I was a girl who technically hadn’t been a girl for the better part of 30 years but who nonetheless felt a strange remove from the word “woman”, which seemed to convey a poise and seriousness I hadn’t yet attained.

I may have been in my mid-40s, but I was still all jokes and hammy self-deprecation, still unable to accept compliments, still flirting with men by defaulting to my best Diane Keaton in Manhattan impression, even though it had been decades since I was attracted to the kind of men who were attracted to that.

I was all the things I’d been when I was young except for the young part. I had a nicer apartment, a little more money, and a little more professional recognition. I had a dog (this I’d longed for in my 20s the way some women long for babies) and a car that I had to move for alternate-side street cleaning. But my days were more or less the same. I sat at my desk and drank coffee. I did my work when I could, but more often I stared into space and wondered what would become of my life. I surfed the internet at a connection speed that would have been unimaginable in 1995.

In part because of that connection speed, the space I stared into most of the time wasn’t my own physical space but some unholy rotation of social media, news media and floating junk courtesy of cyberspace. By the time Donald Trump entered office, I probably spent at least three-quarters of my waking hours with my head in this space. By the time #MeToo reached full force, my brain no longer felt connected to my body. At times, my brain no longer felt associated with my brain as I’d once known it. There were moments in which I couldn’t remember the names of people I’d been acquainted with for years.

In intense, animated conversations with friends and colleagues, I’d find myself revving up to some sort of grand insight and then suddenly sputtering out mid-sentence, like a rollercoaster propelled halfway up a loop but unable to make it all the way around. Bunched up in my desk chair, I would stare at the computer screen for hours, hunting for words as though tracking lions on safari and practically sweating from the exertion. More than a few times I wondered if I was experiencing some form of dementia.

I once read that there’s scientific proof of a correlation between increased nostalgia and creeping senility. And since returning to New York, I’d been soaking in nostalgia. Everywhere I went, my 20s played in my head like a song stuck there permanently. Every neighborhood, every subway station, in some areas every street corner, echoed with some memory from that time. There was John’s pizzeria on Bleecker, where, at 21 and playing hooky from college upstate, I sat with a man – a boy, really – who both was and wasn’t my boyfriend and listened to him reminisce about his old girlfriend, who, he said, was “sexy without being pretty, if that makes any sense”.

There, among the slabs of buildings of Midtown Sixth Avenue, were the offices of more temp jobs than I could count: banks, law firms, insurance companies, each with its own mini kitchen and passcode-protected employee restrooms. There, at 57th and Broadway is a Duane Reade pharmacy that was once Coliseum Books, a place where the feral woman had often stood and yelled: “Sign the petition!”

I remember being dumped on Delancey Street, kissed on Charles Street, having a strange and short-lived personal assistant job in a musty apartment on Sutton Place.

I remember standing on the corner of Eighth Avenue and 49th Street as hail rained down like shellfire one summer night following a long, somewhat drunken dinner with an older man in a powerful position whose meal invitations I dreaded but nonetheless felt obliged to accept.

Those meals had started out as business lunches but then migrated into semi-business dinners. During these dinners, the man would tell me certain details about his personal life, which was in a state of acute crisis. I didn’t particularly want to be there but I accepted the invitations because there was in this transaction the implicit notion that he could help my career, albeit in a rather vague, abstract way. I accepted them so because not doing so felt like a kind of professional self-sabotage, as foolish and irresponsible as missing deadlines.

At no time did the man make an ultimatum or proposition me directly. I never felt like I was being sexually harassed and obviously no one was kidnapping me from my apartment and forcibly escorting me to the Oyster Bar, where the man would sit waiting for me, smoking probably the fourth of 15 cigarettes he’d smoke that night. I’ll cop to a certain psychological gamesmanship on my part as well. I’d occasionally bum a cigarette from him, an act that gave me a sense of distance and control but that surely read to him as an intimate gesture.

At least a few times, after I probably had one too many glasses of wine, I became rather suggestive and flirtatious, inquiring into his personal life, seeing how much I could get him to disclose as he got drunker. I did this in part as a defense mechanism. The more we talked about him, the less we talked about me. But I also did it because I wanted to mess with his head, and I was young enough then to think that doing so would serve as some kind of tacit punishment for his behavior.

The truth, of course (which anyone but a young twerp would have the wisdom to realize), was that messing with his head was its own reward for him. I wasn’t censuring his behavior as much as reinforcing it. As for my own, I’ve been cringing about it ever since.

Looking back, it would be easy to say I behaved like this out of some instinctive subordination to the man’s power. There’s an element of truth to that, but there’s also an angle at which the situation could be viewed as quite the opposite. From this angle, I behaved the way I did because in some ways the power imbalance between the two of us was tipped in my favor.

I was young and the man was twice my age. He may have had professional power over me, but it was limited and in no way unilateral. In fact, thanks to the personal details I’d siphoned out of him, I probably could have placed one phone call and made his life very difficult. And so I carried on with my coquettishness until somehow the meals became fewer and farther between and then finally ended, probably because he took up with someone else. I carried on this way because my life was an open horizon and his was an overstuffed attic.

I behaved this way because I must have known on some unconscious level that, at 25, I had more of a certain kind of power than I was ever going to have in my life and that I might as well use it, even if the accompanying rush was laced with shame.

This was the summer of 1995. Alanis Morissette’s Jagged Little Pill had come out that June, and I listened to it pretty much on constant repeat through August. One night, after doing my silly routine with this man and riding the subway home in self-disgust, I sat in my room and played Jagged Little Pill and then wandered into the kitchen to talk to my roommate. I remember grumbling to her about my dinner companion, complaining about his lechery while conveniently omitting the parts when I’d dramatically exhaled on my cigarette, looked him straight in the eye, and said something devastatingly witty and possibly a tiny bit dirty. (I’d like to add that I winked, but that wouldn’t past the truth test, since I’m physically unable to wink.)

Instead I said: “God, what a perv.”

“Sounds annoying,” my roommate said. “But hey, you keep showing up. You must be getting something out of it.”

I behaved this way because I must have known that, at 25, I had more power than I was ever going to have in my life

During the Fall of the Fall of Man, I thought a lot about the showing up I’d done over the years. Every woman seemed to be taking this kind of inventory. It was like a novel everyone was reading, one with a plot that seemed easy enough to follow but whose underlying themes and messages amount to an abstruse thicket of personal projection and postmodern obfuscation.

Like any sentient being, I’d been shocked and disgusted by the Weinstein revelations and saw no reason to equivocate about the reliability of his accusers or the severity of his punishment. But as the list of perpetrators piled up and the public censure piled on, the conversation around #MeToo (lacking a specific category, each new scandal was not a story or an issue but a “conversation”) began to split down generational lines.

The first incident to put this divide in notably sharp relief involved a secret Google spreadsheet called the Shitty Media Men list. This was an anonymously sourced, living document meant to warn women about certain men in the media business, mostly publishing, who were known for inappropriate sexual or sexually charged behavior.

It included all kinds of men, from powerful editors to freelance writers, and described alleged misdeeds that ranged from “weird lunch dates” to inappropriate flirting to stalking to physical violence and all-out rape. And though the list was never officially published and disappeared from Google Docs almost as quickly as it emerged, enough screenshots were taken that the perpetrators became common knowledge almost immediately.

Within hours of the list’s discovery, the chief line of inquiry around it, even more so than “Who started it?”, was whether infractions like “weird lunches” should be lumped in with crimes like rape. Unsurprisingly, I found myself on the side of the oldsters who were deeply troubled not just by this “lumping” (again, there seemed to be only one operative word, and in this case it was “lump”) but by the idea that anonymously sourced accusations could be made against publicly named people without warning or any sort of due process.

“This is so wrong!” my same-age friends and I ranted. “You can’t just do this! These millennials don’t get it!” We said this as we forwarded the screenshots among each other, gawking at the names we recognized.

“Weird lunch!” I said to more than one person. “Welcome to publishing! I’m going to write a memoir about my early days in New York and call it Weird Lunch.”

And as the “conversation” lurched along and the narrative of the “generational divide” became the default narrative, I found myself reminded of this passage of time on a daily, even hourly, basis. When a scandal broke involving the actor and comedian Aziz Ansari, I felt that my membership on Team Older Feminist was so official that I might as well take out a charge card at Eileen Fisher and call it a day (though has anyone under 40 ever used a “charge card”?)

And so the ground began to shake around the fault line. The older feminists scolded the younger ones for not being tough enough to take care of themselves. If the construction worker whistles at you, give him the finger! If the drunk guy sitting next to you at the wedding reception gets fresh, kick him in the shins!

In turn, the youngsters chastised the oldsters for enabling the oppressive status quo with cool-girl posturing. We shouldn’t have to suppress our humanity by letting insults roll off us! We shouldn’t have to risk our safety with physical violence because patriarchal norms have taught the drunk wedding guest he can act like that!

Neither side was entirely wrong, of course. But both sides were talking past each other in ways that suggested there was no meeting in the middle. In the New York Times, Daphne Merkin identified a gulf between what women said publicly about #MeToo and the eye-rolling that went on in private. “Publicly, they say the right things, expressing approval and joining in the chorus of voices that applaud the takedown of maleficent characters who prey on vulnerable women in the workplace,” she wrote. “In private it’s a different story. ‘Grow up, this is real life,’ I hear these same feminist friends say.”

In the Atlantic, Caitlin Flanagan, whose tendency toward a certain impish prudery has never made her popular among young feminists, wrote that the Ansari fracas, at least the version of it chronicled on Babe.net, constituted “3,000 words of revenge porn”. She decried the helplessness of “a whole country full of young women who don’t know how to call a cab”.

On cable news, the HLN anchor Ashleigh Banfield looked straight into the camera and addressed “Grace” directly.

“What you have done in my opinion is appalling,” said Banfield, calling the allegations “reckless and hollow” and charging Grace with having “chiseled away at a movement that I along with all of my sisters in the workplace have been dreaming of for decades”.

This being cable news, Banfield’s producers invited Katie Way to appear on the show. And this being the digital era, Way declined the offer not with a “no thanks” but by popping off an email that called Banfield a “burgundy lipstick bad highlights second wave feminist has-been” and noted that “no woman my age would ever watch your network”.

As I watched all of this whiz past me on my computer screen, sharpened by the reading glasses I’d lately been forced to wear, I wondered if my real problem with young feminists was how little they seemed to need us older ones. As far as I could see, they didn’t even want to know us.

At 25, I not only wanted to know people like Daphne Merkin and Ashleigh Banfield, I wanted to be them. There were hundreds of women in my imaginative orbit – some of them over 50 or possibly even 60 – whom I felt this way about. I knew none of them, but I wanted to be all of them. Together, they formed a great phalanx of wise elders whose only duty to me was to be themselves. My duty, in turn, was to watch and learn. By which I mean that was my duty to myself.

But something was different back then. I shared a planet with those elders. We occupied the same universe. We breathed the same air. The same cannot be said for the relationship between my generation and those that are coming up behind us.

The world has changed so much between my time and theirs that someone just 10 years younger might as well belong to a different geological epoch. To a young person, someone like me is not so much an elder as an extinction. Is it any wonder, then, that older generations’ contributions to the conversation are, at best, a kind of verbal meteor shower, the flickering, nattering remains of planets that haven’t existed for eons?

So this is where I find myself. Amid my exasperation and confusion, I have wandered into a devastating but oddly beautiful revelation: my generation will be the last to have known the world in its analog form. As a result, we’ve grown old before actually getting old. We’ve become dinosaurs before we’re even 50.

And it’s here, from this primitive-creature vantage point, that I find myself pressed up against yet another revelation: the questions we face now when it comes to men and women are questions that arose a split second ago. Modern humans have been around for about 200,000 years. Civilization as we know it has been churning away for perhaps 6,000 years. Until the birth control pill came along in 1960, we were all essentially prisoners of nature, with women’s conditions being markedly worse, sometimes obscenely so.

Until 1960, the idea that women could compete with men in the job market, that men should do housework, that women had any purpose in life higher than having babies and men had any purpose higher than financially supporting those babies or going to war to protect them, was something close to unthinkable.

That we have come so far in so little time is a marvel. That we should expect all the kinks to have been worked out by now is insane.

In the scheme of things, the 59 years that have elapsed between 1960 and today is a nanosecond, a flash of time so imperceptible that it has passed in increments of billions by the time you have read this sentence. It was already nearly 30 years ago that the feral woman was out there with her folding table yelling: “Sign the petition.” It was already nearly 30 years ago that, as far as I was concerned, I owned the world. It feels like yesterday. Then again, every day feels like yesterday. Every day becomes yesterday before you know it.


NEW ARTICLE


Brexit weekly briefing: all eyes on EU summit as deadline looms
New extension beyond 31 October seems inevitable, even as PM gains support for his Brexit deal

Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing. If you’d like to receive this as a weekly email, sign up here. You can also catch our latest Brexit Means … podcast here, and for daily updates, head to Andrew Sparrow’s politics live blog.

Top stories

It was another rollercoaster week, beginning with widespread predictions that Boris Johnson’s Brexit plan was all but dead as No 10 admitted there was little prospect of a deal before 31 October and bitter recriminations flew.

But as the government set up a Westminster Brexit showdown by calling MPs to sit in an exceptional Saturday session on 19 October, the day after this week’s EU summit, the prime minister and the Irish taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, met on the Wirral.

To most people’s surprise, the two men emerged from more than three hours of talks agreeing that there was a “pathway to a possible deal”, prompting the chief EU negotiator, Michel Barnier, and the Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, to meet in Brussels.

The EU subsequently agreed to enter so-called “tunnel discussions” on a possible deal based on Johnson’s acknowledgement – a big concession from his previous position – that there could not be a customs border on the island of Ireland.

With the Northern Ireland unionists of the DUP promising to be “flexible” and the EU talking up the prospects of a Brexit extension beyond 31 October if necessary, many – including the culture secretary, Nicky Morgan, – saw the chances of a deal as promising.

Quick guide Why is the Irish border a stumbling block for Brexit? Show Hide Counties and customs Inside the EU, both Ireland and Northern Ireland are part of the single market and customs union so share the same regulations and standards, allowing a soft or invisible border between the two.

Britain’s exit from the EU – taking Northern Ireland with it – risks a return to a hard or policed border. The only way to avoid this post-Brexit is for regulations on both sides to remain more or less the same in key areas including food, animal welfare, medicines and product safety. The 'backstop' in Theresa May's Withdrawal Agreement was intended to address this - stating that if no future trade agreement could be reached between the EU and the UK, then rules and regulations would stay as they are. This has been rejected by Brexit supporters as a 'trap' to keep the UK in the EU's customs union, which would prevent the UK striking its own independent trade deals. There are an estimated 72m road vehicle crossings a year between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, and about 14% of those crossings are consignments of goods, some of which may cross the border several times before they reach a consumer. Brexit supporters say this can be managed by doing checks on goods away from the border, but critics say it will be difficult to police this without any physical infrastructure like border posts or cameras, which could raise tensions in the divided communities of Ireland. Interactive: A typical hour in the life of the Irish border Photograph: Design Pics Inc/Design Pics RF

A weekend of talks, however, ended with Barnier saying there had been no major breakthrough. A timely deal looked “impossible”, he said, warning that negotiations may have to continue as UK’s Irish border plans represented an “untested” risk.

The British proposal takes Northern Ireland out of the EU customs union, with the UK agreeing to enforce the bloc’s customs rules and tariffs on goods moving from Britain to Northern Ireland and a rebate system to compensate affected businesses.

With Johnson edging steadily towards the numbers needed to pass a deal in the Commons as more hardline Eurosceptics and pro-deal Labour MPs indicated they could back a new agreement, momentum began to grow.

Dampening expectations somewhat, Finland’s prime minister, Antti Rinne, warned there was not enough time left for a formal agreement before the summit began on Thursday and Barnier said a deal this week remained “difficult, but possible”.

But after the EU’s chief negotiator set Johnson a deadline of midnight on Tuesday to concede to EU demands and agree to a customs border in the Irish Sea if he wanted a deal by Saturday, EU and UK sources said the two sides were on the brink of success – despite misgivings in Paris and Berlin at the rush to a deal.

What next

It depends what happens at the summit. The prime minister has made a series of major U-turns, giving EU officials hope he will table a legal text based on the February 2018 Northern Ireland-only backstop rejected by Theresa May as a constitutional outrage.

Will Boris Johnson have a deal to put to MPs on Saturday? Read more

De jure, Northern Ireland would be in the UK’s customs territory, but de facto it will be in Britain’s, is the idea. (A similar deal was blown up by the DUP and the hardline ERG group last year, but both seem to be giving Johnson more leeway.)

But Johnson could also walk out on the summit and attack Brussels for intransigence. Or the two sides could agree to further negotiations next week, opening up the possibility of a second EU summit, perhaps on 29 October, to sign off on a deal. Either way, a new extension beyond 31 October looks inevitable.

Ideally, Johnson would probably like to put a deal to parliament on 19 October come what may. But France and Germany want more time, and fudge, delay and prevarication have been the watchwords throughout the Brexit process. There is no reason to doubt they will not be now.

Best of the rest

Top comment

In the Guardian, Rafael Behr argues that any Johnson-style deal will sow the seeds of future confrontation with the EU:

Johnson envisages a future in which the UK does not shadow EU market rules. The greater the regulatory divergence on either side of a border, the harder that border has to be. Zoom out further and you see a statement of intent by the UK to gain a competitive edge by undercutting its former EU partners. The original economic conception of Brexit is to make Britain a low-cost lure for investment. Brussels doesn’t like the sound of that. May was persuaded of the need for strategic proximity to the rest of Europe and saw economic alignment as a necessary condition to achieve that. Johnson’s view is different. In his world, the UK can develop an economic model conceived by people who despise the EU, alongside a foreign policy in which UK-EU relations are unaffected. He seems to think that EU leaders do not notice or do not mind. He is mistaken. There are no reserves of personal trust in the prime minister and he has hitched himself to a doctrine of cut-throat competition that, whether he understands it or not, sets the UK on an economic collision course with Brussels. Even with a deal, the consequences will be messy.

Top tweet

Brexit legal commentator David Allen Green is absolutely not wrong:


NEW ARTICLE


China slams House’s passage of bill supporting Hong Kong democracy as city’s dysfunction deepens
Concerns about dysfunction in Hong Kong are growing. The disruption of the speech, which leader Carrie Lam was forced to deliver via video amid a heavy police presence aimed at deterring more protests, underscored how little room officials have to maneuver as pressure mounts for a resolution to the crisis.

AD

AD

China promised Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy until 2047 — a half-century after its handover from British rule, under a “one country, two systems” principle — but Beijing has been tightening its grip. Activists say the ruling Communist Party has gradually chipped away at the rights enjoyed by the people of Hong Kong that do not exist in mainland China, such as an independent judiciary and freedom of assembly.

After months of clashes between pro-democracy protesters and riot police in Hong Kong sparked by now-shelved plans to allow extraditions to the mainland, the city’s government invoked emergency powers this month to ban masks at protests. The intensifying crackdown prompted U.S. lawmakers to propose the bill, which must get a green light from the Senate and White House before it becomes law.

“The extraordinary outpouring of courage from the people of Hong Kong stands in stark contrast to a cowardly government that refuses to respect the rule of law or live up to the ‘one country, two systems’ framework, which was guaranteed more than two decades ago,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D.-Calif.) said Tuesday.

AD

AD

On Wednesday, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang voiced Beijing’s “strong indignation and firm opposition” to the bill and said China would take strong measures to safeguard its interests.

He said the bill demonstrated a “naked double standard, which fully exposes the extreme hypocrisy of some people in the U.S. on the issues of human rights and democracy and their sinister intentions to undermine Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability and contain China’s development.”

Yang Guang, spokesman for China’s Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, which oversees Hong Kong affairs, said the bill “openly supports the opposition and radical forces in Hong Kong.”

“It fully exposes the political plot of the U.S. House of Representatives and some politicians to use Hong Kong as a card to contain and restrain China’s development,” he said.

For Hong Kong, which is tipping toward recession, the bill could portend severe economic consequences. An end to the special trading relationship with the United States would erode the city’s advantages as a Western-friendly business hub and a regional base for multinational firms.

AD

AD

The United States is Hong Kong’s second-largest trading partner, with estimated two-way trade of $69 billion in 2017. It is also the second-largest destination for Hong Kong exports, which amounted to $42 billion.

Other measures passed in the House on Tuesday would prohibit U.S. exports of military and crowd-control gear used by Hong Kong police.

Hong Kong’s government issued a lengthy statement detailing the ways it abides by the “one country, two systems” framework.

“Safeguarding human rights and freedoms is a constitutional duty of the [Hong Kong] government,” the statement said, adding that police have acted with “restraint” and “in strict accordance with the law.”

AD

A government spokesman added that “foreign legislatures should not interfere in any form in the internal affairs” of Hong Kong.

AD

On Wednesday, riot police sealed off the city’s legislative chambers as Lam, the Hong Kong leader, arrived to deliver her annual policy address.

Minutes into her appearance, pro-democracy lawmakers heckled Lam and forced her to suspend the speech. Some held signs saying “Five Demands, Not One Less,” a reference to protesters’ demands, with an image of a smiling Lam featuring bloodied hands.

Lam “has killed Hong Kong, there is blood on her hands. She has made millions of protesters take to our streets,” said Tanya Chan, a pro-democracy lawmaker. “Hong Kong cannot go back to what it was anymore.”

AD

In her video address, Lam announced measures to address housing supply and affordability in the city, the world’s most expensive property market. The housing situation is often cited as a source of public discontent, especially among young people who say they are often locked out of an economic system that favors tycoons and the pro-Beijing elite.

AD

Lam said the unrest in Hong Kong was a hindrance to economic growth and to the government’s work.

“Employees of all trades and sectors, as well as small, medium and large businesses alike are deeply worried about the prospect of Hong Kong,” Lam said. “People are asking: will Hong Kong return to normal? Is Hong Kong still a place we can live in peace?”

AD

Anna Fifield in Beijing and Tiffany Liang in Hong Kong contributed to this article.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


Apartment building in upscale Brazil neighborhood is latest to collapse without warning
Firefighters searched the rubble for survivors.

“For now we are trying to hear sounds that indicate where people are,” Fortaleza fire spokesman Romario Fernandes told the Associated Press. “There are several layers of debris.”

AD

AD

Architecture student David Sampaio lived on the first floor of the building. He was in the hallway, heading to class, when the structure collapsed.

Trapped under debris, he sent a photo to his family’s chat group to let them know he was still alive. He and 10 other survivors were rescued.

“I’m very happy my son had a second chance at life,” Sampaio’s father told the local news site Globo.com. “But this collapse was preventable.”

The cause of the collapse was unclear. But building residents reportedly had shared concerns on social media about a construction project that had exposed rebar in foundation pillars.

“They are breaking the whole concrete structure that surrounds the pillars,” one resident wrote in messages published by the Fortaleza newspaper Diario do Nordeste. “I’m getting very scared of that.”

AD

AD

The disaster revealed vulnerabilities in Brazil’s urban infrastructure, long bedeviled by structural hazards, lax oversight and occupation by squatters. Now as economic stagnation strangles the country and more structures fall into disrepair, such collapses have become a recurring problem.

Twenty-three people were killed in April when a building in a poor part of Rio de Janeiro collapsed after being soaked by days of rain.

Seven died in May 2018 when a Sao Paulo high-rise occupied by squatters caught fire and crumbled.

A few months later, in September, a fire raged through Rio’s 200-year-old national museum, destroying nearly the entire collection. A faulty air conditioner was blamed, but the building lacked fire doors, sprinklers or water hoses.

AD

Seventeen people were killed in 2012 when three adjacent office buildings in Rio collapsed, one after another.

AD

The challenge of solving the country’s infrastructure problem is immense: Just to maintain and modernize existing structures, the consulting firm Inter B concluded this year, Brazil would have to double its 2019 investment in infrastructure to nearly $100 billion.

But since Brazil’s economy slowed to a standstill, public spending as a percentage of gross domestic product has shrunk to half what it once was.

“It is essential that public funds be restored so infrastructure investment can be sustainably restarted,” Inter B President Cláudio Frischtak wrote. Even private investment requires public planning, he said.

AD

In an effort to strengthen the country’s infrastructure, President Jair Bolsonaro launched a plan recently to double private investment in the sector by 2022.

Brazil’s infrastructure woes have been aggravated by housing shortages in major cities. In Greater Sao Paulo, 1.2 million families live as squatters in abandoned buildings or makeshift houses or are homeless, according to the municipal housing secretary. Housing rights activists often take over dilapidated buildings to pressure the government to provide affordable housing. More than 150 buildings in the city have been seized by squatters.

AD

With few affordable options, many families are forced to live in makeshift homes in slums outside the city. Under heavy rains or in mudslides, these houses are often the first to crumble.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


China slams House’s passage of bill supporting Hong Kong democracy as city’s dysfunction deepens
Concerns about dysfunction in Hong Kong are growing. The disruption of the speech, which leader Carrie Lam was forced to deliver via video amid a heavy police presence aimed at deterring more protests, underscored how little room officials have to maneuver as pressure mounts for a resolution to the crisis.

AD

AD

China promised Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy until 2047 — a half-century after its handover from British rule, under a “one country, two systems” principle — but Beijing has been tightening its grip. Activists say the ruling Communist Party has gradually chipped away at the rights enjoyed by the people of Hong Kong that do not exist in mainland China, such as an independent judiciary and freedom of assembly.

After months of clashes between pro-democracy protesters and riot police in Hong Kong sparked by now-shelved plans to allow extraditions to the mainland, the city’s government invoked emergency powers this month to ban masks at protests. The intensifying crackdown prompted U.S. lawmakers to propose the bill, which must get a green light from the Senate and White House before it becomes law.

“The extraordinary outpouring of courage from the people of Hong Kong stands in stark contrast to a cowardly government that refuses to respect the rule of law or live up to the ‘one country, two systems’ framework, which was guaranteed more than two decades ago,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D.-Calif.) said Tuesday.

AD

AD

On Wednesday, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang voiced Beijing’s “strong indignation and firm opposition” to the bill and said China would take strong measures to safeguard its interests.

He said the bill demonstrated a “naked double standard, which fully exposes the extreme hypocrisy of some people in the U.S. on the issues of human rights and democracy and their sinister intentions to undermine Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability and contain China’s development.”

Yang Guang, spokesman for China’s Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, which oversees Hong Kong affairs, said the bill “openly supports the opposition and radical forces in Hong Kong.”

“It fully exposes the political plot of the U.S. House of Representatives and some politicians to use Hong Kong as a card to contain and restrain China’s development,” he said.

For Hong Kong, which is tipping toward recession, the bill could portend severe economic consequences. An end to the special trading relationship with the United States would erode the city’s advantages as a Western-friendly business hub and a regional base for multinational firms.

AD

AD

The United States is Hong Kong’s second-largest trading partner, with estimated two-way trade of $69 billion in 2017. It is also the second-largest destination for Hong Kong exports, which amounted to $42 billion.

Other measures passed in the House on Tuesday would prohibit U.S. exports of military and crowd-control gear used by Hong Kong police.

Hong Kong’s government issued a lengthy statement detailing the ways it abides by the “one country, two systems” framework.

“Safeguarding human rights and freedoms is a constitutional duty of the [Hong Kong] government,” the statement said, adding that police have acted with “restraint” and “in strict accordance with the law.”

AD

A government spokesman added that “foreign legislatures should not interfere in any form in the internal affairs” of Hong Kong.

AD

On Wednesday, riot police sealed off the city’s legislative chambers as Lam, the Hong Kong leader, arrived to deliver her annual policy address.

Minutes into her appearance, pro-democracy lawmakers heckled Lam and forced her to suspend the speech. Some held signs saying “Five Demands, Not One Less,” a reference to protesters’ demands, with an image of a smiling Lam featuring bloodied hands.

Lam “has killed Hong Kong, there is blood on her hands. She has made millions of protesters take to our streets,” said Tanya Chan, a pro-democracy lawmaker. “Hong Kong cannot go back to what it was anymore.”

AD

In her video address, Lam announced measures to address housing supply and affordability in the city, the world’s most expensive property market. The housing situation is often cited as a source of public discontent, especially among young people who say they are often locked out of an economic system that favors tycoons and the pro-Beijing elite.

AD

Lam said the unrest in Hong Kong was a hindrance to economic growth and to the government’s work.

“Employees of all trades and sectors, as well as small, medium and large businesses alike are deeply worried about the prospect of Hong Kong,” Lam said. “People are asking: will Hong Kong return to normal? Is Hong Kong still a place we can live in peace?”

AD

Anna Fifield in Beijing and Tiffany Liang in Hong Kong contributed to this article.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


The awkward tension underlying the West’s anger at Turkey
On Monday, recognizing the discontent among lawmakers, President Trump imposed sanctions on Turkey’s defense and energy ministries, as well as some high-profile Turkish officials. But those punitive measures didn’t suffice. Members of the House and Senate will weigh parallel bills, possibly as early as Wednesday, that would in addition target the American assets of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and suspend U.S. military support for a NATO ally.

AD

AD

Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-Md.), who is leading the congressional sanctions effort alongside Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), described Trump’s initial moves, which included higher steel tariffs, as a “pathetic response” to Turkey’s invasion. “Steel exports to the U.S. are only 4 tenths of 1% of Turkey’s exports,” tweeted Van Hollen. “And while Trump ‘talks’ about sanctions on Turkish officials, he still plans to meet Erdogan next month. Congress must stay the course and enact tough sanctions that impact Turkish conduct.”

Despite U.S. sanctions, Turkey forged ahead with its military offensive in northern Syria https://t.co/XIJKjjupjf pic.twitter.com/rVty0DdDD2 — Reuters Top News (@Reuters) October 15, 2019

As Washington Post columnist David Ignatius observed, Trump’s initial acquiescence to Erdogan and his decision to fully withdraw U.S. forces from northeastern Syria — where they were helping protect a de facto autonomous Syrian Kurdish state — has infuriated myriad U.S. officials in the military, diplomatic and intelligence communities, all of whom are aware of the thousands of Kurdish lives lost in the U.S.-led campaign against the Islamic State.

“It’s a dagger to the heart to walk away from people who shed blood for us,” one former top CIA official told Ignatius. “It will go down in infamy,” said an Army officer who served in the Syria campaign. “This will go down as a stain on the American reputation for decades.”

AD

AD

This sense of outrage is not only felt in Washington. The Canadian Foreign Ministry announced that it was at least temporarily suspending new weapons sales to Turkey on Tuesday, warning in a statement that Ankara’s “unilateral action risks undermining the stability of an already fragile region, exacerbating the humanitarian situation and rolling back progress” achieved by the anti-ISIS coalition.

Some European powers have already done the same. On Monday, European Union member states collectively pledged to suspend arms exports to Turkey — though they stopped short of implementing a formal bloc-wide embargo. But various countries, including Germany, France, Finland and Sweden, had enacted embargoes of their own by the weekend. Britain followed suit on Tuesday.

“This is not the action we expected from an ally,” said British foreign secretary Dominic Raab, referring to Turkey. “It is reckless. It is counterproductive and plays straight into the hands of Russia, and indeed the Assad regime.”

AD

AD

UPDATED LIST OF ARMS EMBARGO TO TURKEY



— NATO allies

• Italy 🇮🇹

• France 🇫🇷

• The Netherlands🇳🇱

• Norway 🇳🇴

• Germany 🇩🇪

• Britain🇬🇧

• Czechia 🇨🇿



—Non-NATO

• Finland 🇫🇮



— ALSO

• EU 🇪🇺 made a call to all member states to suspend arms exports to Turkey — Ragıp Soylu (@ragipsoylu) October 15, 2019

Erdogan is not a popular figure in the West, where many governments view his increasingly autocratic rule to be corroding Turkish democracy. But the speed with which other governments came crashing down on Ankara struck others as somewhat curious.

“Western powers unleashed a wave of sanctions against Turkey over its Syria incursion,” tweeted Ragip Soylu, Turkey correspondent for the Middle East Eye. “NONE of them wanted to [do] the same when Saudi Arabia massacred thousands in Yemen, murdered [journalist Jamal] Khashoggi.”

The juxtaposition is worth considering. For years, Saudi Arabia has led a ruinous campaign against Yemen’s Houthi rebels. Airstrikes on critical infrastructure and a maritime blockade contributed to the collapse of Yemen’s already impoverished economy. The bleak conditions led to one of the world’s worst cholera epidemics while possibly more than half of the country remains in desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Moreover, U.N. investigators suggested in September that the Saudis — and perhaps the Americans, British and French allies who armed them — could be guilty of potential war crimes over the course of the conflict.

AD

AD

Yet none of the mounting anger over the multiyear war in Yemen that has been voiced by Western civil society and various lawmakers has translated into the same sweeping political action that a few days of Turkish incursions provoked this week.

There may be understandable reasons for this double standard. Turkey is a NATO member and a nominally democratic nation that’s still seen in a different light than an opaque gulf monarchy. The besieged Syrian Kurdish faction that Turkey views as a “terrorist” group played a vital role in securing Western strategic interests in Syria — unlike the Iran-linked Houthis. And the Saudis remain big customers: In 2017 alone, E.U. countries granted licenses to export arms to Saudi Arabia worth close to $19 billion.

For all the Western antipathy toward Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, the Turkish president still seems to loom as a larger boogeyman. In Europe, Erdogan is widely seen as the dangerous demagogue next door. In the United States, he has become an adversary in allied clothing.

AD

AD

“Obsession with Erdogan has always distorted Turkey policy in Washington,” Soner Cagaptay, author of “Erdogan’s Empire: Turkey and the Politics of the Middle East,” told Today’s WorldView.

In the early years of his reign, Erdogan was the toast of Western capitals, hailed as an epoch-redefining liberal who was shaking up the Turkish state still dominated by an overweening military and an asphyxiating civil bureaucracy. “Because people so firmly believed that he was going to make Turkey democratic, they overlooked his democratic transgressions,” Cagaptay said, pointing to earlier purges Erdogan’s government carried out against political opponents.

Now, though, Erdogan is reviled, especially by the American foreign policy establishment. And so Washington “distorts Turkey’s policy in the other direction,” said Cagaptay, seeing only the mustachioed would-be autocrat in Ankara, while ignoring widespread concerns, shared by many of Erdogan’s domestic opponents, over the dangers of a Syrian Kurdish statelet emerging on the Turkish border.

AD

AD

Turkey’s incursions have now made its fraught relationship with the United States the focus of conversation in Washington. Vice President Pence and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo reportedly headed to Ankara for crunch talks over a possible cease-fire and way forward.

In an op-ed published this week in the Wall Street Journal, Erdogan sniped at his critics both in the West and the Arab world, arguing that he was cleaning up a mess that others had a hand in making. “The international community missed its opportunity to prevent the Syrian crisis from pulling an entire region into a maelstrom of instability,” wrote Erdogan, insisting that his government’s new campaign would “restore peace and stability.”

A legion of critics would disagree, pointing to reports of new atrocities, the displacement of tens of thousands of civilians, and fears of the resurgence of the Islamic State. But in a part of the world where regional powers pay little price for causing such havoc, Erdogan’s gambit may end up being once more par for the course.

Want smart analysis of the most important news in your inbox every weekday, along with other global reads, interesting ideas and opinions? Sign up for the Today’s WorldView newsletter.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


U.K. and E.U. negotiators talk into early morning with hopes for a Brexit deal
Prime Minister Boris Johnson has staked his political future on leading his country out by Oct. 31 — or at least on being seen to have tried his utmost.

But even though policymakers on both sides seemed more optimistic than they had in months that a deal might be imminent, it was far from clear whether it will actually happen. Not only does Johnson first have to strike a bargain with the European Union — itself a difficult task — he then must sell it at home. British domestic politics can be unforgiving, as Johnson’s predecessor Theresa May learned after making a deal with Brussels only to have it defeated three times in Parliament.

AD

AD

The key sticking point in the closed-door talks in Brussels was the future of Northern Ireland, which will depart the E.U. along with the rest of the United Kingdom. Both the U.K. and the E.U. say they want to keep open the border with the Republic of Ireland, to preserve the hard-won peace there. They have disagreed about how to achieve that, with the E.U. saying Northern Ireland would have to remain tightly aligned with its own rules.

May had said “no U.K. prime minister would ever agree to” a proposal that would create a customs border in the Irish Sea. And Johnson had resisted the idea. But on Tuesday, he seemed to be moving far closer to European demands in a bid to push the talks to a conclusion.

E.U. leaders will meet in Brussels Thursday and Friday, when they will either sign off on a deal, agree to delay the Brexit date beyond October or brace for a sudden and uncontrolled British departure from the bloc.

AD

AD

Barnier told reporters ahead of the marathon negotiations: “Even if the agreement will be difficult, more and more difficult, to be frank, it is still possible this week.”

One European diplomat involved in the negotiations said late Tuesday that “there is light in the tunnel, but for the moment it comes from only neon tubes, not from the exit.” The diplomat spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the closed-door talks.

The Irish border has proved to be one of the most vexing issues facing negotiators over the past three years. The promise of an open border is central to the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, which ended the Troubles, as the 30 years of sectarian violence in Northern Ireland are known.

AD

Today the boundary is mostly invisible. A driver whizzing between Belfast and Dublin is not required to stop for any customs check or security control. There are no tollbooths, no cameras, not even a signpost. Brexit could change all that. If the United Kingdom has its own set of tariffs and regulations, Europeans would demand a customs border to prevent smuggling and ensure the integrity of their own internal market.

AD

But both sides fear it could lead to violence.

While the sweeping, E.U. bureaucratic hub of the Berlaymont building in Brussels was busy with Brexit talks, so too was Johnson’s official residence at 10 Downing Street, where ministers and lawmakers dashed in and out all day Tuesday.

AD

By some counts, compared to May, Johnson would face an even tougher vote in the House of Commons. His Conservative Party no longer holds a majority, and opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn has warned that his Labour Party will not support Johnson’s “Tory Brexit,” no matter the details (though some Labour rebels have signaled they might just back a deal).

The most hard-line Brexiteers, known as the “Spartans,” may also rise up against any deal that crosses their red lines.

But there were signals that the Tories might rally behind their new prime minister.

AD

Steve Baker, leader of the pro-Brexit European Research Group (ERG), left a meeting Tuesday at 10 Downing Street telling reporters outside that he was “optimistic that it is possible to reach a tolerable deal that I am able to vote for.”

AD

The former leader of the ERG and now leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, pleaded with fellow Conservatives to trust Johnson because — unlike May — he is a true Brexiteer, a leader of the winning June 2016 campaign to leave the European Union.

Rees-Mogg said Parliament was desperate for a deal.

He was asked by Sky News over the weekend if he would vote for a deal similar to May’s customs partnership deal, which he once called “completely cretinous.”

Rees-Mogg conceded that he may have to “eat my words.”

He added that “there’s a line from Churchill saying that he often had to eat his words and he found it to be a very nourishing diet, and that is something that happens in politics.”

AD

AD

Even tougher for Johnson and any deal he crafts are the 10 lawmakers from the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) from Northern Ireland, who have opposed any kind of Brexit deal that would see the Irish province treated differently than England, Wales and Scotland, their fellow nations in the U.K.

Arlene Foster, the DUP leader, visited Johnson again on Tuesday night, and before entering 10 Downing promised she would “do what’s best for the union.”

Afterward, a DUP spokesman said: “It would be fair to indicate gaps remain and further work is required,” seemingly splashing a bit of cold water on hopes that a deal would be reached in the evening.

Booth reported from London. Quentin Ariès in Brussels and Karla Adam in London contributed to this report.


NEW ARTICLE


Apartment building in upscale Brazil neighborhood is latest to collapse without warning
Firefighters searched the rubble for survivors.

“For now we are trying to hear sounds that indicate where people are,” Fortaleza fire spokesman Romario Fernandes told the Associated Press. “There are several layers of debris.”

AD

AD

Architecture student David Sampaio lived on the first floor of the building. He was in the hallway, heading to class, when the structure collapsed.

Trapped under debris, he sent a photo to his family’s chat group to let them know he was still alive. He and 10 other survivors were rescued.

“I’m very happy my son had a second chance at life,” Sampaio’s father told the local news site Globo.com. “But this collapse was preventable.”

The cause of the collapse was unclear. But building residents reportedly had shared concerns on social media about a construction project that had exposed rebar in foundation pillars.

“They are breaking the whole concrete structure that surrounds the pillars,” one resident wrote in messages published by the Fortaleza newspaper Diario do Nordeste. “I’m getting very scared of that.”

AD

AD

The disaster revealed vulnerabilities in Brazil’s urban infrastructure, long bedeviled by structural hazards, lax oversight and occupation by squatters. Now as economic stagnation strangles the country and more structures fall into disrepair, such collapses have become a recurring problem.

Twenty-three people were killed in April when a building in a poor part of Rio de Janeiro collapsed after being soaked by days of rain.

Seven died in May 2018 when a Sao Paulo high-rise occupied by squatters caught fire and crumbled.

A few months later, in September, a fire raged through Rio’s 200-year-old national museum, destroying nearly the entire collection. A faulty air conditioner was blamed, but the building lacked fire doors, sprinklers or water hoses.

AD

Seventeen people were killed in 2012 when three adjacent office buildings in Rio collapsed, one after another.

AD

The challenge of solving the country’s infrastructure problem is immense: Just to maintain and modernize existing structures, the consulting firm Inter B concluded this year, Brazil would have to double its 2019 investment in infrastructure to nearly $100 billion.

But since Brazil’s economy slowed to a standstill, public spending as a percentage of gross domestic product has shrunk to half what it once was.

“It is essential that public funds be restored so infrastructure investment can be sustainably restarted,” Inter B President Cláudio Frischtak wrote. Even private investment requires public planning, he said.

AD

In an effort to strengthen the country’s infrastructure, President Jair Bolsonaro launched a plan recently to double private investment in the sector by 2022.

Brazil’s infrastructure woes have been aggravated by housing shortages in major cities. In Greater Sao Paulo, 1.2 million families live as squatters in abandoned buildings or makeshift houses or are homeless, according to the municipal housing secretary. Housing rights activists often take over dilapidated buildings to pressure the government to provide affordable housing. More than 150 buildings in the city have been seized by squatters.

AD

With few affordable options, many families are forced to live in makeshift homes in slums outside the city. Under heavy rains or in mudslides, these houses are often the first to crumble.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


‘I can’t even look at the atrocities’: U.S. troops say Trump’s Syria withdrawal betrayed an ally
“I look at that event and it stands out to me as so representative of the sacrifice the Kurds made in the fight against ISIS,” Palmer said, using an acronym that describes the Islamic State. “It’s just one of many instances where they showed that type of bravery. The very next day, they were right back at it.”

AD

Palmer, 32, is among several thousand U.S. troops and veterans who served in northern Syria and are witnessing the messy end of a years-long alliance with the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces.

AD

The U.S.-backed militia has been one of America’s closest partners in the war against the Islamic State since 2014, and some 11,000 Kurdish fighters have been killed in combat against the terrorist group. But with President Trump’s order to withdraw all 1,000 U.S. troops from northern Syria in the face of a Turkish offensive, those who have served alongside Kurdish forces are left to consider America’s new place in the world.

“It feels like we’re abandoning our closest ally in the fight against ISIS, and we’re abandoning them to a fate that is going to end very poorly for them,” said Palmer, who left active duty last year. To “completely abandon” a force that has “given thousands of lives for this conflict is really tough to watch.”

AD

U.S. veterans have supported Trump in part because of his often-repeated promises to extricate the U.S. military from a generation at war, numerous polls have found. But the calamity on the ground in Syria has wrought angry reactions from service members like few other recent foreign policy decisions.

AD

Troops have reacted viscerally in interviews and on social media despite Defense Department restrictions on them expressing political opinions. Some who served in northern Syria also have spoken out despite associations with secretive Special Operations units that rarely speak to the media and do not want their service members identified.

The sequence of events have played a significant role in that.

AD

On Oct. 6, the White House announced that the United States would not stand in the way of a Turkish military offensive to remove the SDF near Turkey’s border, despite two years of U.S. troops effectively serving in the area as a guard against just that.

The Pentagon pulled about 50 service members away from two Syrian border towns before the offensive began, and Trump ordered a quick withdrawal of the remaining 1,000 U.S. troops in northern Syria on Saturday after the violence spiraled out of control and SDF leaders who had relied on the United States sought help from the Syrian regime, which is backed by Russia and Iran.

AD

Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper said Sunday that Turkey had indicated it would launch its offensive “regardless of what we did” and that there was “no way we could have stopped 15,000 Turks.”



AD

﻿But at least eight U.S. service members who served with Kurdish forces in Syria and Iraq expressed disgust in interviews with The Washington Post about the rapid U.S. changes and the lack of a clear plan to prevent a crisis. Many of them, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue, doubted that Turkish forces would have launched an assault into northern Syria if the White House had not said it would stand aside.

“I can’t even look at the atrocities,” an Army officer who served in Syria last year said of videos posted online of Turkish-backed fighters executing Kurdish civilians. “The ISIS mission is going to stop, ISIS is going to have a resurgence, and we’re going to have to go back in five years and do it all again.”

AD

He added that while he was in the Middle East, military officials at the Pentagon sometimes discussed with officers in the field how they could craft a compelling case for Trump to stay longer while a thoughtful exit strategy could be designed.

AD

“I remember hearing, ‘How are we going to phrase terms to convince Trump not to go off a cliff?’ ” the officer said. “It’s like, ‘How do you steer him to the right decision and not where he wants to go?’ ”

Another Army officer who deployed to Syria a few times and has knowledge of ongoing operations predicted in an interview Saturday that if the United States didn’t change its policy within 48 hours, “everything over the last five years is done.” Within hours, Trump had ordered a full U.S. troop withdrawal from northeastern Syria.

The officer said the United States aided the Turkish offensive by talking the SDF into taking down some of its defenses in the border region under the premise that the United States would stay involved and then allowing the Turkish operation to go forward.

AD

AD

“Folks are heartbroken,” the second officer said. “It’s very different than if we had said, ‘We are getting out of Syria in six months.’ Reasonable-man definition says that we facilitated that attack.”

The abrupt change followed more than a year of Trump pressing to get U.S. troops out of Syria, with directives for the military to withdraw passed in April and December 2018. The latter one prompted Defense Secretary Jim Mattis to resign, but in both cases, senior advisers talked Trump into slowing down.

One Special Forces soldier with several deployments to northern Syria said he blamed senior military leaders for not finding a way out of Syria faster given Trump’s well-known desires.

AD

The Kurdish forces fought hard, but the U.S. partnership with them was always going to be problematic, he said. The Kurdish fighters in Syria have links to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or PKK, in Turkey, which both Ankara and Washington have labeled a terrorist organization.

AD

“If someone had presented Trump with a six-month withdrawal plan and actually stuck to it, we wouldn’t be having these conversations,” the soldier said. “You can tell me horror stories and show me intel reports, and none of it would matter to me. I fully support withdrawing from Syria.”

Early in Special Forces training, soldiers are taught not to “fall in love with your partner force,” he said. That means they learn to build up other groups like the SDF, but only in support of U.S. interests. He recalled seeing Kurds in Syria hoist a banner of Abdullah Ocalan, the PKK’s jailed leader, after one operation and wearing PKK memorabilia on their uniforms.

AD

“Our collective entity in Syria tried to explain to them: ‘You can’t do that. If you do that, it puts us in a very precarious position, and we are providing unparalleled and unequaled-in-history air support.’ ” he said. “They still did it.”

AD

Other soldiers said Turkey’s anger about the United States teaming up with Kurdish forces had been managed for more than two years and could continue to be contained. With teams of U.S. service members right along the border in Syria, they said, it was unlikely that Turkey would want to get into a war with the United States after their decades-long alliance in NATO.

Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy, asked Monday about the service members’ criticism on Syria, said he likes candor but that soldiers must not be disobedient.

“Everybody has an opinion in a war of ideas,” he said, speaking at a conference of the Association of the U.S. Army. “But ultimately, when national policy decisions are made, we salute and move out.”


NEW ARTICLE


House Democrats focus on Mulvaney, Bolton after key witness testimony in impeachment inquiry
The actions of Mulvaney and Bolton attracted considerable attention after two witnesses testified that the acting White House chief of staff was involved in setting up a separate channel to handle diplomacy with Ukraine, which angered Bolton.

AD

AD

Despite stonewalling by the White House, investigators secured hours of testimony Tuesday from George Kent, the deputy assistant secretary of state responsible for Ukraine. Michael McKinley, a former senior adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, is slated to testify behind closed doors Wednesday.

“We have been bringing witnesses in at quite a furious pace,” House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.) told reporters.

Last month, the White House released a rough transcript of a July 25 call in which Trump asked Ukraine to investigate former vice president and 2020 presidential candidate Joe Biden and his son Hunter at a time when U.S. military aid was being withheld from the country. A whistleblower’s complaint about the call sparked the impeachment inquiry.

AD

In congressional testimony, witnesses have painted a picture of a White House bitterly divided not just over Ukraine, which has long been reliant on military aid and political support from the United States as it fights Russian-backed separatists, but also over which political appointees were calling the shots on foreign policy: the experienced national security staff, or a group of Trump loyalists and the president’s personal attorney, Rudolph W. Giuliani.

AD

In testimony Tuesday, Kent said Mulvaney organized a meeting last spring where officials decided to take Ukraine policy out of the traditional channels, putting Energy Secretary Rick Perry, U.S. Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland and then-special envoy to Ukraine Kurt Volker in charge instead.

Kent told House investigators that he was instructed to “lay low,” focus on the five other countries in his portfolio, and defer to Volker, Sondland and Perry — who called themselves the “three amigos” — on matters related to Ukraine, Rep. Gerald E. Connolly (D-Va.) told reporters Tuesday.

AD

Fiona Hill, the National Security Council’s former top adviser on Russia and Europe, told investigators Monday that Bolton was infuriated by a shadow operation being conducted by Giuliani to pressure Ukraine into digging up dirt on the president’s political rival.

AD

Hill said Bolton, who instructed her to raise the matter with White House lawyers, even likened Giuliani to a “hand grenade,” according to two people familiar with her testimony. Hill also testified that Bolton wanted to make clear that he was not involved and very opposed to what he called the “drug deal” between Mulvaney and Sondland, the people said.

Schiff, in consultation with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), would decide on calling Mulvaney and Bolton to testify, but several Democrats said they wanted to interview the two.

AD

“Mulvaney has the inside understanding of why the money was withheld on the security assistance,” said Rep. Jackie Speier (D-Calif.), a member of the House Intelligence Committee, who said the two men should testify.

“They’re going to be good witnesses,” quipped Rep. Debbie Dingell (D-Mich.). “I suspect we will [need to hear from them]; we need to get the facts.”

AD

Pelosi again Tuesday rejected calls by Trump and Republicans to hold a formal vote on an impeachment inquiry, arguing that neither the Constitution nor House rules require it.

The decision to forgo a formal vote was prompted by a combination of concerns, according to multiple Democratic aides who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe internal discussions. A handful of vulnerable Democratic “frontliners” seeking reelection in GOP-leaning districts see some political peril in taking a vote to authorize a formal probe, while a broader swath of the caucus simply balked at the notion of having Trump and his Republican allies dictate the terms of the impeachment inquiry — an argument that ultimately swayed Pelosi.

AD

Inside a caucus meeting Tuesday night, Rep. Anthony Brindisi (D-N.Y.), who represents a district Trump won by 15 points in 2016 and is one of only seven Democrats who have not endorsed the impeachment probe, argued to Pelosi and other leaders that the Constitution gives the House broad latitude in pursuing impeachment and that the chamber would be ill-served to “play into Republicans’ hands” and heed calls for a formal vote. “You said it perfectly,” Pelosi replied, according to three people in the room, effectively shutting down further debate.

AD

In a news conference after the meeting, Schiff defended the inquiry against GOP attacks targeting the secrecy of the closed-door interviews and asserting that the process has been unfair to Trump. Schiff compared the private nature of the probe to the secretive special-counsel investigations that preceded the articles of impeachment against Presidents Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton. Only after those probes were largely complete did the House vote to open formal impeachment proceedings.

Schiff, moreover, argued that Republicans were simply seeking to distract from Trump’s alleged misdeeds: “They don’t want to discuss the president’s conduct. They’d rather talk process.”

AD

Pelosi left open the prospect of holding a vote later, and the Democratic aides said that moment could come if a judge ruled against the House in court, or after the three investigative committees wrap up their initial probe and prepare to hand a case to the House Judiciary Committee for the drafting of formal impeachment articles.

AD

“We’re not here to call bluffs,” Pelosi said. “We’re here to find the truth. . . . This is deadly serious for us.”

Discussions about next steps came as Vice President Pence, the Pentagon, the Office of Management and Budget, and Giuliani refused to cooperate with the investigation. Asked how the House planned to compel Trump allies to comply, Pelosi declined to answer.

AD

Trump ousted Bolton last month after a rocky relationship in which the two men clashed over policy on North Korea, Iran and Afghanistan, among other issues. The president even disparaged Bolton as he left, saying he had made “some very big mistakes.”

Bolton, who initially declined to comment, said in a text: “I will have my say in due course.” He is reportedly writing a book.

Many of the revelations about Bolton’s stance were first reported by the New York Times.

AD

According to one person familiar with Hill’s testimony, Bolton was so alarmed by the efforts of Giuliani, Sondland and Mulvaney to circumvent the National Security Council and the diplomatic corps that he dispatched her to raise the concern with White House lawyers.

AD

The order came after Volker, Bolton, Sondland, Hill and Perry met in early July. During the meeting, Sondland blurted out to the other officials that there were “investigations that were dropped that need to be started up again” in Ukraine, according to a U.S. official familiar with the matter. The officials understood him to be referring to Burisma, a Ukrainian energy company, and Joe Biden’s son Hunter Biden, who sat on its board.

Bolton went “ballistic” after the meeting, the official said.

Hill herself got into a confrontation with Sondland over his involvement in Ukrainian affairs, according to one person familiar with her testimony, as Ukraine is not in the European Union and thus not part of his ambassadorial portfolio. Sondland said he had been put in charge by Trump, the person said — something Hill likened to the bravado of Alexander Haig, then secretary of state, who said he was in charge after a 1981 assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan.

AD

Sondland, who obeyed State Department orders not to show up for a planned deposition last week, is expected to testify in the House’s impeachment inquiry Thursday under subpoena. Text messages provided to the panel by Volker showed that it was Sondland who defended the president in early September, when other diplomats expressed concern that U.S. military assistance was being withheld from Ukraine to push its leaders to conduct a politically motivated investigation of Burisma.

Hunter Biden served on Burisma’s board for five years; Joe Biden is currently making a White House bid.

Trump told Mulvaney in mid-July to hold back almost $400 million in congressionally approved military aid for Ukraine. That order came the same week Hill resigned from the National Security Council; it also took place one week before Trump spoke with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky by phone, when he appeared to pressure Zelensky to investigate the Bidens and purported Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.

It is not yet clear whether the White House will attempt to block parts of Sondland’s testimony by asserting executive privilege over the president’s interactions with the ambassador. But any claim of privilege could be distinctly weakened by the White House’s decision to release a rough transcript of Trump’s call with Zelensky, according to a person familiar with the matter.

The White House could have also missed an opportunity to claim privilege over Sondland’s conversations by failing to assert privilege over Volker’s testimony. If lawyers for Sondland — or eventually the courts — decide that means the president waived his right to claim privilege over the matters discussed in the texts Volker shared with the committees, Sondland would be able to speak freely.

The White House sent Hill letters before her deposition Monday warning her about respecting executive privilege, though it was never claimed officially to the committee. For those in government, testifying as the White House asserts privilege could come with professional consequences, but the White House has essentially no way to punish former officials — unless the information they share is classified, in which case disseminating it could be a crime.


NEW ARTICLE


Grief, accusations surround killing of Kurdish politician in northeastern Syria
Her death caused an outcry within Kurdish communities and leadership, which deemed it a war crime committed in the midst of a Turkish incursion into Syria’s Kurdish-controlled northeast.

About a week ago, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s government launched a military operation that it said is aimed at clearing the Turkey-Syria border of Syrian Kurdish fighters, whom it accuses of links to Kurdish militants inside Turkey, and repatriating Syrian refugees.

AD

AD

The United States, which had partnered with the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces in the fight against the Islamic State militant group in Syria, condemned the Turkish operation, as did other Western allies of Turkey, warning that it could lead to a resurgence of the Islamic State.

Kurdish leaders have accused an Islamist fighter of Khalaf’s killing, identifying him as a member of the rebel group Ahrar al-Sharqiya. The group falls under the Syrian National Army, an umbrella group fighting alongside Turkish armed forces in northeastern Syria.

A State Department spokesman, speaking on background, said Tuesday that reports of the killing of Khalaf and several captured SDF fighters were “extremely troubling, reflecting the overall destabilization of northeast Syria since the commencement of hostilities.”

AD

AD

“We condemn in the strongest of terms any mistreatment and extrajudicial execution of civilians or prisoners, and are looking further into these circumstances,” the spokesman added.

In Khalaf’s memorial service Sunday in Malikiyah, also known as Derik, her mother noted that her daughter had three degrees: civil engineering, English and Kurdish. “But my daughter was not satisfied with these diplomas and decided to participate in building Syria,” she said, according to an official statement issued by the party.

“My daughter Hevrin today got the highest of degrees: She was martyred for the sake of the people and the homeland and the cause,” she said.

AD

Noubhar Mustafa, a roommate and colleague of Khalaf, remembered her as “beautiful, quiet, kind, compassionate.”

Mustafa said: “She got emotional about mothers’ suffering. She got emotional about women’s suffering. They would come to our center in Raqqa; she would listen to their stories and despite the fact that she’s a political figure, her human and compassionate side took over.”

AD

The Center for Studies and Protection of Women’s Rights in Syria also paid tribute, saying: “Hevrin Khalaf was not a fighter fighting in the ranks of the Syrian Democratic Forces or others. She was a Syrian citizen and a civil engineer who worked to serve her homeland, Syria.”

AD

“What she was exposed to, a barbaric murder at the hands of Erdogan’s lackeys, only reveals the malice of these groups and their lack of humanity,” it said.

The killing is under investigation by Ahrar al-Sharqiya, said Ziad al-Khalaf, a member of the group.

But Khalaf told The Washington Post that “until now, there has been no proof” that a member of the group was responsible for the killing.

Hassan al-Shami, a spokesman for the group, said Hevrin Khalaf was not a politician but an agent of U.S. intelligence, noting that her party was established on Washington’s orders.

AD

“We in Ahrar al-Sharqiya and other Syrian National Army factions are partaking in the Peace Spring Operation with the Turkish brothers. The aim of this operation is combating terrorism. . . . If we find a terrorist or a spy, what do you expect us to do?” the spokesman told The Post.

AD

“The day she was killed, she was on the 712 road,” said Youssef Hammoud, a spokesman for the Syrian National Army. “That is tens of kilometers away from the M4” — a highway that the National Army said it had reached during the fighting.

Asser Khattab in Beirut contributed to this report.

AD


NEW ARTICLE


Some booed Saudi-Palestinian soccer match in West Bank even before it started
So when the Green Falcons ran out on the field as visitors at Faisal al-Husseini stadium, it ended Saudi Arabia’s decades-long boycott of playing in the West Bank in protest of Israel’s control over Palestinian borders. Some Palestinian activists condemned the Saudis’ appearance for “normalizing” the status quo as part of a subtle recent thawing of relations between the Arab power and Israel.

AD

AD

But the governing Palestinian Authority hailed the game as a boost for sovereignty over local turf, if only the turf of a soccer pitch.

“We welcome the Saudi team here to play for the first time on our own soil,” said Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas after the players had stepped off their bus from the Jordanian border for a welcome that would include a state dinner and a visit to al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.

In 2015, during the last lead-up to

the World Cup, the United Arab Emirates became the first team willing to play in the modern, 12,500-seat stadium next to the concrete security wall dividing Israeli and Palestinian territory. But the Saudis, considered then as now the dominant soccer power in the region, refused an invitation to follow suit.

AD

“Saudi Arabia is in a different league, just a massive brand in the Arab world,” said Uri Levy, a Jerusalem-based soccer journalist who was the first to report on the Saudis’ change of heart for this round. “This decision will have huge consequences.”

AD

Interest in the game was sky-high among West Bank fans. Thousands of free tickets were distributed in hours by the local phone company, Jawwal.

“People are thrilled the Saudis are here,” said Hamad Tomaleh, who was wearing a Palestinian national jersey and handing out tickets in the Ramallah mall. Soccer “is like religion here.”

In the end, the Palestinians, in front of a crowd that overflowed onto surrounding rooftops, would hold the Saudis to a 0-0 tie.

AD

But it is the political gamesmanship that has generated controversy. The Israeli government hasn’t commented on the Saudi-Palestinian match, but Israel has historically welcomed such ordinary interactions with its Arab neighbors.

Further, the country is widely seen as waging an unacknowledged effort to ease tensions with Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states, mostly over their shared concerns about Iran. The Israeli Foreign Ministry declined to comment for this article.

A number of Palestinian activists and militant groups denounced both the Palestinian Authority for inviting the Saudis and the Saudis for accepting. Some, pointing out that Israel won’t even allow Palestinian teams from the Gaza Strip to travel to the West Bank stadium, launched an online campaign against the Saudi appearance under the banner: “Normalization is treason.”

AD

AD

Khalil Shaheen, a political analyst at the Palestinian Center for Policy Research and Strategic Studies-Masarat in Ramallah, said Abbas and the Palestinian leadership were too eager to host an important game.

“He is achieving the Israeli goal without knowing it,” Shaheen said. “This is what gives Israel an excuse to say things are normal here.”

Saudi and Palestinian officials rejected the criticism.

“Just by visiting the prisoners at the jail doesn’t mean that you are supporting the jailers,” Jibril Rajoub, the fiery head of the Palestinian Football Association, said in an interview after a dinner with the Saudi delegation in the West Bank town of Rawabi. “It’s good for the Palestinian people, and it’s good for the Palestinian cause.”

AD

The Palestinians launched a major effort to lure the Saudi team. Rajoub, a high-ranking member of Abbas’s Fatah party who refers to himself as “an ex-freedom fighter who spent 17 years in Israeli jails,” said he was on the phone with an invitation to his counterpart in Riyadh as soon as the World Cup group draw was announced. Abbas followed up with a personal appeal, according to the Saudis.

AD

“The president of the Palestinian government sent a letter to our king,” said Yasser al-Mishal, president of the Saudi Football Federation, who was at the dinner with Rajoub.

After multiple meetings with both Jordanian and Palestinian officials, the Saudis decided to reverse their long-standing position.

AD

“It is a simple right for every national team in the world to host their own games in their own stadium,” Mishal said. “We thought that coming would also give a message to everyone that Palestine has its own territory and its own rights, and we support that.”

He declined to address the political element, other than to say he was unaware of any approval needed from higher-ups in Saudi government.

“From my end, it’s a purely sports event,” he said.

AD